CHAPTER TWELVE 


Jo HN NT Fontane wavcd a casual dismissal to the manservant 
and said, ‘ Sec you in the morning, Billy. ’ ITie coloured butler 
bowed his way out of the huge dining room-living room with 
its view of the Pacific Ocean. It was a friendly-goodbye sort of 
bow, not a servant's bow, and given only because Johnny 
Fontane had company for dinner. 

Johnny's company was a girl named Sharon Moore, a New 
York Qty Greenwich Village girl in Hollywood to try for a 
small part in a movie being produced by an old flame who had 
made the big time. She had visited the set while Johnny was 
acting in the Wolt2 movie. Johnny had found her young and 
firesh and charming and witty, and had asked her to come to his 
place for dinner that evening. His invitations to dinner were 
already famous and had the force of royalty and of course she 
said yes. 

Sharon Moore obviously expected him to come on very 
strong because of his reputation, but Johmiy hated the Holly- 
wood ‘piece of meat’ approach. He never slept with any girl 
unless foere was something about her he really liked. Except, 
of course, sometimes when he was very drunk and found him- 
self in bed with a girl he didn’t even remember meeting or 
seeing before. And now that he was thirty-five years old, 
divor/ced once, estranged from his second wife, with maybe 
a thousand pubic scalps dangling from his bdt, be simply 
wasn’t that eager. But there was something about Sharon 
Moore that aroused affection in him and so he had invited her 
to dinner. 

He never ate much but he knew young pretty girls am- 
bitiously starved themselves for pretty clothes and were 
usually big eaters on a date so there was plenty of food on the 
table. There was also plenty of liquor: champagne in a bucket, 

158 



Scotch, rye, brandy, 4Uid liqueurs on the sideboard. Johnny 
served the drinks and the plates of food already prepared. 
When they had finished earing he led her into the huge living 
room with its glass wall that looked oik on to the Pacific. He 
put a stack of Ella Fitzgerald records on the hi-fi and settled on 
the conch with Sharon. He made a little small talk with her, 
found out about what she had been like as a kid, whether she 
had been a tomboy or boy crazy, whether she had been homely 
or pretty, lonely or gay. He always ^ound these details touch- 
ing, it always evoked the tenderness he needed to make love. 

They nestled together on the sofa, very friendly, very com- 
fortable. He kissed her on the lips, a cool frien^y kiss, and 
when she kept it that way he left it that way. Outside the huge 
picture window he could sec the dark blue sheet of the Pacific 
lying flat beneath the moonlight. 

‘How come you’re not playing any of your records?’ 
Sharon asked him. Her voice was teasing. Johnny smiled at 
her. He was amused by her teasing him. * I’m not that Holly- 
wood,’ he said. 

‘Play some for me,’ she said. ‘Or sing for me. You know, 
like the movies. I’ll bubble up and melt all over you just like 
those girls do on the screen.’ 

Johnny laughed outright. When he had been younger, he 
had done just such things and the result had always been 
stagy, the girls trying- to look sexy and melting, making their 
eyes swim with desire for an imagined fantasy camera. He 
would never dream of singing to a girl now; for one thing, he 
hadn’t sung for months, he didn’t trust his voice. For another 
thing, amateurs didn’t realize how much professionals de- 
pended on technical help to sound as good as they did. He 
could have played his records but he felt the same shyness 
about hearing his youthful passionate voice as an ageing, balding 
man running to fat feels about showing pictures of himself as a 
youth in the full bloom of manhood. 

‘My voice is out of shape,’ he said. ‘And honesdy. I’m sick 
of hearing myself sing.’ 

They both sipped their drinks. ‘I hear you’re great in this 
picture,’ she said. ‘Is it true you did it for nothing?’ 

‘Just a token payment,’ Johnny said. 



He got up to give her a refill on her brandy glass, gave her a 
gold-monogtammed cigarette and flashed his lighter out to 
hold the light for her. She pufied on the cigarette and sipped 
her drink and he sat down l^ide her again. His glass had con- 
siderably more brandy in it than hers, he needed it to warm 
himself, to cheer himself, to charge himself up. His situation 
was the reverse of the lover’s usual one. He had to get himself 
drunk instead of the girl. The girl was usually too willing 
where he was not. The last two years had been hell on his ego, 
and he used this simple way to restore it, sleeping with a young 
fresh girl for one night, taking her to dinner a few times, 
giving her an expensive present, and then brushing her off in 
the nicest way possible so that her feelings wouldn’t be hurt. 
And then they could always say they had had a thing with the 
great Johnny Fontaric. It wasn’t true love, but you couldn’t 
knock it if the girl was beautiful and genuinely nice. He hated 
the hard, bitchy ones, the ones who screwed for him and then 
rushed off to tell their friends that they’d screwed the great 
Johnny Fontane, always adding that they’d had better. What 
amaaed him more than anything else in his career were the 
complaisant husbands who almost told him to- his face that 
they forgave their wives since it was allowed for even the 
most virtuous matron to be unfuthful with a great singing and 
movie star like Johnny Fontane. That really floored him . 

He loved Ella Fitzgerald on records. He loved that kind of 
dean singing, that kind of dean phrasing. It was the only 
thing in life he really understood and he knew he understood 
it better than anyone dse on earth. Now lying back on the 
couch, the brandy warming his throat, he fdt a desire to sing, 
not music, but to phrase with the records, yet it was something 
impbssible to do in front of a stranger. He put his free hand in 
Shiuron’s lap, sipping his drink from his o^er hand. Without 
any slyness but with the sensualness of a child seeking warmth, 
his hand in her lap pulled up the silk of her dress to show 
milky white thigh above the sheer netted gold of her stockings 
and as always, despite all the women, ^ the years, all the 
fiuniliarhy, Johnny felt the fluid sticky wacmoess flooding 
through his body at that sight. The mirade still happened, and 
what would he do when t^t fidlcd him as his voioe hadP 

160 



He was ready now. He pot his drink down on die long in- 
laid cocktail table and turned his body towards ber. He was 
very sure, very deliberate, and yet tender. There was nothing 
sly or lecherously lascivious in his caresses. He kissed her on 
the lips while his hands rose to her breasts. His hand fell to her 
warm thighs, the skin so silky to his touch. Her returning kiss 
was warm but not passionate and he preferred it that way 
right now. He hated girls who turned on all of a sudden as if 
their bodies were motors galvanized into erode pumpings by 
the touching of a hairy switch. 

Then he did something he always did, something that had 
never yet failed to arouse him. Delicately and as lightly as it 
was possible to do so and still feel something, he brushed the 
dp of his middle dnger deep down between her thighs. Some 
girls never even felt that inidal move towards lovemaking. 
Some were distracted by it, not sure it was a physical touch 
because at the same dme he always kissed them deeply on the 
mouth. Srill others seemed to suck in his hnger or gobble it up 
with a pelvic thrust. And of course before he became famous, 
some girls had slapped his face. It was his whole technique and 
usually it served him well enough. 

Sharon’s reaction was unusual. She accepted it all, the 
touch, the kiss, then shifted her mouth off his, shifted her body 
ever so slightly back along the couch and picked up her drink. 
It was a cool but definite refusal. It happened somedmes. 
Rarely; but it happened. Johnny picked up his drink and lit a 
cigarette. 

She was saying something very sweedy, very lightly. *It*8 
not that I don’t like you, Johnny, you’re much nicer than I 
thought you’d be. And it’s not because I’m not that kind of a 
girl. It’s just that I have to be turned on to do it with a guy, 
you know what I mean?’ 

Johnny Fontane smiled at her. He still liked her. *And 1 
don’t turn you on?’ 

She was a litde embarrassed. 'Well, you know, when you 
were so great singing and all, I was still a Utde kid. I sort of just 
missed you, I was the next generadon. Honest, it’s not that 
I*ffi goody-goody. If you were James Dean or somebody I grew 
op on, rd have my pandes o£ in a second.’ 

i6i 


Godftrhcf- 6 



He didn’t like her quite $o mudt now. She was aweet, the 
was witty, she was int^gent. She hadn’t &llen all ovei herself 
to screw for him or try to hustle him because his connexions 
would help her in show hiz. She was really a straight kid. But 
there was something else he recognized. It had happened a 
few times before. The girl who went on a date with her mind 
all made up not to go to bed with him, no matter how mudi 
she liked him, just so that she could tell her friends, and even 
more, herself, that she had turned down a chance to screw for 
the great Johnny Fontane. It was something he understood 
now that he was older and he wasn’t angry. He just didn’t like 
her quite that much and he had really liked her a lot. 

And now diat he didn’t like her quite so much, he relaxed 
more. He sipped his drink and watched the Pacific Ocean. She 
said, ‘I hope you’re not sore, Johnny. I guess I’m being 
square, I guess in Hollywood a girl’s supposed to put out just 
as casually as kissing a beau goodnight. I just haven’t been 
around long enough.’ 

Johnny smiled at her and patted her cheek. His hand fell 
down to puli her skirt discreetly over her rounded silken 
knees. ‘I’m not sore,’ he said. ‘It’s nice having an old- 
fashioned date.’ Not telling what he felt: the relief at not 
having to prove himself a great lover, not having to live up to 
his screened, godlike image. Not having to listen to the girl 
trying to react as if he really had lived up t;o that image, making 
more out of a very simple, routine piece of ass than it really 
was. 

They had another drink, shared a few more cool kisses and 
then she decided to go. Johnny said politely, ‘Gm I call you 
for dinner some night?’ 

She played it frank and honest to the end. ‘I know you 
don’t want to waste your time and then get disappointed,’ she 
said. ‘Thanks for a wonderful evening. Some day I’ll tell my 
children I had suppei with the great Johnny Fontane all alone 
in his apartment.’ 

He smiled at her. ‘And that you didn’t give in,’ he said. 
They both laughed. ‘They’ll never believe that,’ she said. And 
then Johnny, being a little phony in his turn, said, ‘I’ll give it 
to you in writing, want me to?’ She shook her h^. He con- 

162 



tinued on. ‘Anybody doubts you, give me a buz2 on the phone, 
1*11 straighten them right out. Fll tell them how I chased you 
all around the apartment but you kept your honour. OK?’ 

He had, finally, been a little too cruel and he felt stricken at 
the hurt on her young face. She understood that he was telling 
her that he hadn’t tried too hard. He had taken the sweetness 
of her victory away from her. Now she would feel that it had 
been her lack of charm or attractiveness that had made her the 
victor this night. And being the girl she was, when she told the 
story of how she resisted the great Johnny Fontane, she 
would always have to add with a wry litde smile, ‘Of course, 
he didn’t try very hard.’ So now taking pity on her, he said, ‘ If 
you ever feel real down, give me a ring. c3k? I don’t have to 
shack up every girl 1 know.* 

‘1 wiU,’ she said. She went out the doot. 

He was left with a long evening before him. He could have 
used what Jack Woltz called the ‘meat factory’, the stable of 
willing starlets, but he wanted human companionship. .He 
wanted to talk like a human being. He thought of his first wife, 
Virginia. Now that the work on the picture was finished he 
would have more time for the kids. He wanted to become part 
of their life again. And he worried about Virginia too. She 
wasn’t equipped to handle the Hollywood sharpies who might 
come after her just so that they could brag about having 
screwed Johnny Fontane’s first wife. As far as he knew, no- 
body could say that yet. Everybody could say it about his 
second wife though, he thought wryly. He picked up the 
phone. 

He recognized her voice immediately and that was not sur- 
prising. He had heard it the first time when he was ten years 
old and they had been in 4B together. ‘Hi, Ginny,* he said, 
‘you busy tonight? Can I come over for a little while?* 

‘All right,’ she said. ‘The kids are sleeping though; 1 don’t 
want to wake them up.* 

‘That’s OK,’ he said. ‘1 just wanted to talk to you.* 

Her voice hesitated slightly, then carefully controlled not to 
show any concern, she asked, ‘Is it anything serious, anything 
important?* 

‘No,’ Johnny said. ‘I finished the picture today and I 

165 



thought maybe 1 could just see you and talk to you. Maybe 1 
could take a look at the kids If you*re sure diey won*t wake 
up.* 

*OK,* she said. ‘I’m glad you got that part you wanted.’ 

‘Thanks/ he said. ‘I’ll sec you in about a haLT hour.’ 

When he got to what had been his home in Beverly Hills, 
Johnny Fontane sat in the car for a moment staring at the 
house. He remembered what his Godfather had said, that he 
could make his own life what he wanted. Great chance if you 
knew what you wanted. But what did he want? 

His first wife was waiting for him at the door. She was 
pretty, petite and brunette, a nice Italian girl, the girl next door 
who would never fool around with another man and that had 
been important to him. Did he still want her, he asked himself, 
and the answer was no. For one thing, he could no longer 
make love to her, their affection had grown too old. And 
there were some things, nothing to do with sex, she could 
never forgive him. But they were no longer enemies. 

She made him cofiee and served him homemade cookies to 
the living room. ‘Stretch out on the sofa,’ she said, ‘you look 
tired.’ He took oQ his jacket and his shoes and loosened his tie 
while she sat in the chair opposite liim with a grave little smile 
on her fiice. ‘It’s funny,’ she said. 

‘What’s fonny?’ he asked her, sipping coffee and spilling 
some of it on his shirt, 

‘The great Johnny Fontane stuck without a date,’ she said. 

‘The great Johnny Fontane is lucky if he can even get it up 
any more/ he said. 

It was unusual for him to be so direct. Ginny asked, ‘ Is there 
something really the. matter?’ 

Johnny grinned at her. ‘I had a date with a girl in my apart- 
ment and she brushed me off. And you know, I was relieved.’ 

To his surprise he saw a look of anger pass over Ginny’s 
face. ‘Don’t worry about those little tramps,’ she said. ‘She 
must have thought that was the way to get you interested in 
her.’ And Johnny realized with amusement that Ginny was 
actually angry with the girl who had turned him down. 

‘Ah, what the hell,’ he said. ‘I’m tired of that stuff. I have to 
grow up sometime. And now that 1 can’t sing any more 1 guess 

164 



rU have a tough time with dames. I never got in on my looks, 
you know.’ 

She said loyally, ‘You were always better looking than you 
photographed.’ 

Johnny shook his head. ‘I’m getting fat and I’m getting 
bald. Hell, if this picture doesn’t make me big again I better 
learn how to bake pizzas. Or maybe we’ll put you in the 
movies, you look great.’ 

She looked thirty-five. A good thirty-five, but thirty-five. 
And out here in HoDywood that might as well be a hundred. 
The young beautiful girls thronged through the city like 
lemmings, lasting one year, some two. Some of them so beauti- 
ful they could make a man’s heart almost stop beating until 
they opened their mouths, until the greedy hopes for success 
clouded the loveliness of their eyes. Ordinary women could 
never hope to compete with them on a physical level. And you 
could talk all you wanted to about charm, about intelligence, 
about chic, about poise, the raw beauty of these girls over- 
powered everything else. Perhaps if there were not so many of 
them there might be a chance for an ordinary, nice-looking 
woman. And since Johnny Fontane could have all of them, or 
nearly all of them, Ginny knew that he was saying all this just 
to flatter her. He had always been nice that way. He had always 
been polite to women even at the height of his fame, paying 
them compliments, holding lights for their cigarettes, opening 
doors. And since all this was usually done for him^ it made it 
even more impressive to the girls he went out with. And he 
did it with all girls, even the one-night stands, I-don’t-know- 
your-name girls. 

She smiled at him, a friendly smile. ‘You already made me, 
Johnny, remember? For twelve years. You don’t*havc to give 
me your* line.’ 

He sighed and stretched out on the sofa. ‘No kidding, 
Ginny, you look good. I wish I looked that good.* 

She didn’t answer him. She could see he was depressed. ‘Do 
you think the picture is OK? Will it do you some good?* she 
asked. 

Johnny nodded. ‘Yeah. It could bring me all the way back. 
If I get the Academy thing and play my cards right, I can make 

165 



it big again even without the singing. Then maybe I can give 
you and the kids more dough.* 

* We have more than enough/ Ginny said. 

‘I wanta see more of the kids too/ Johnny said. ‘I want to 
settle down a little bit. Why can’t I come every Friday night 
for dinner here? I swear Til never miss one Friday, I don’t care 
how far away 1 am or how busy 1 am. And then whenever 1 
can rU spend weekends or maybe the kids can spend some 
part of their vacations with me.’ 

Ginny put an ashtray on his chest. ‘It’s OK with me,’ she 
said. ‘I never got married because I wanted you to keep being 
their father.’ She said this without any kind of emotion, but 
Johnny Fontane, staring up at the ceiling, knew she said it as 
an atonement for those other things, the cruel things she had 
once said to him when their marriage had broken up, when his 
career had started going down the drain. 

‘ By the way, guess who called me,* she said. 

Johnny wouldn’t play that game, he never did. ‘Who?’ he 
asked. 

Ginny said, ‘You could take at least one lousy guess.’ 
Johnny didn’t answer. ‘Your Godfather,’ she said. 

Johnny was really surprised. ‘He never talks to anybody on 
the phone. What did he say to you?’ 

‘He told me to help you,’ Ginny said. ‘He said you could be 
as big as you ever were, that you were on your way back, but 
that you needed people to bdieve in you. 1 asked him why 
should I ? And he said because you’re the father of my children. 
He’s such a sweet old guy and they tell such horrible stories 
about him.’ 

Virginia hated phones and she had had all the extensions 
takep out except for the one in her bedroom and one in the 
kitchen. Now they could hear the kitchen phone ringing. She 
went to answer it. When she came back into the living room 
there was a look of surprise on her face. ‘It’s for you, Johnny,’ 
she said. ‘It’s Tom Hagen. He says it’s important.’ 

Johnny went into the kitchen and picked up the phone. 
‘Yeah, Tom,’ he said. 

Tom Hagen’s voice was cooL ‘Johnny, the God&ther wants 
me to come out and see you and set some things up that can 

i66 



help you out now that the picture is finished. He wants me to 
catch the morning plane. Can you meet it in Los Angeles? I 
have to fly back to New York the same night so you won’t 
have to worry about keeping youi night free for me.’ 

‘Sure, Tom/ Johnny said. ‘And don’t worry about me 
losing a night. Stay over and relax a bit. I’ll throw a party and 
you can meet some movie people.’ He always made that offer, 
he didn’t want the folks from his old neighbourhood to think 
he was ashamed of them. 

‘Thanks,* Hagen said, ‘but I really have to catch the early 
morning plane back. OK, you’ll meet the eleven-thirty am out 
of New York?’ 

‘Sure,’ Johnny said. 

‘ Stay in your car,’ Hagen said. ‘ Send one of your people to 
meet me when I get off the plane and bring me to you.’ 

‘Right,’ Johnny said. 

He went back to the living room and Ginny looked at him 
inquiringly. ‘My Godfather has some plans for me, to help me 
out,’ Johnny said- ‘He got me the part in the movie, I doh’t 
know how. But I wish he’d stay out of the rest of it.’ 

He went back on to the sofa. He felt very tired. Ginny said, 
‘ Why don’t you sleep in the guest bedroom tonight instead of 
going home. You can have breakfast with the kids and you 
won’t have to drive home so late. I hate to think of you all 
alone in that house of yours anyway. Don’t you get lonely?’ 

‘I don’t stay home much,’ Johnny said. 

She laughed and said, ‘Then you haven’t changed much.’ 
She paused and then said, ‘Shall 1 fix up the other bedroom?’ 

Johnny said, ‘Why can’t I sleep in your bedroom?’ 

She flushed. ‘No,’ she said. She smiled at him and he smiled 
back. They were still friends. • 

When Johnny woke up the next morning it was late, he 
could tell by the sun coming in through the drawn blinds. It 
never came in that way unless it was in the afternoon. He 
yelled, Tiey, Ginny, do I still rate breakfast?’ And far away he 
heard her voice call, ‘Just a second.’ 

And it was just a second. She must have had everything 
ready, hot in the oven, the tray waiting to be loaded, b^use 
as Johnny lit his first cigarette of the day, the door of the 

167 



bedroom opened and his two small daughters came in wheeling 
the breakfast cart. 

They were so beautiful it broke his heart. Their faces were 
shining and clear, their eyes alive with curiosity and the eager 
desire to run to him. They wore their hair braided old- 
fashioned in long pigtails and they wore old-fashioned frocks 
and white patent-leather shoes. They stood by the breakfast 
cart watching him as he stubbed out his cigarette and waited 
for him to call and hold his arms wide. Then they came 
running to him. He pressed his face between their two fresh 
fragrant cheeks and scraped them with his beard so that they 
shrieked. Ginny appeared in the bedroom door and wheeled 
the breakfast cart the rest of the way so that he could eat in 
bed. She sat beside him on the edge of the bed, pouring bis 
coffee, buttering his toast. The two young daughters sat on 
the bedroom couch watching him. They were too old now for 
pillow fights or to be tossed around. They were already 
smoothing their mussed hair. Oh, Christ, he thought, pretty 
soon they^'ll be all grown up, Hollywood punks will be out 
after them. 

He shared his roast and bacon with them as he ate, gave 
them sips of cofi'ee. It was a habit left over from when he had 
been singing with the band and rarely ate with them so they 
liked to share his food when he had his odd-hour meals like 
afternoon breakfasts ot morning suppers. The change-around 
in food delighted them - to eat steak and french fries at seven 
in the morning, bacon and eggs in the afternoon. 

Only Ginny and a few of his close friends knew how much 
he idolized his daughters. That had been the worst thing about 
the divorce and leaving home. The one thing he had fought 
about, and for, was his position as a father to them. In a very 
sly way he had made Ginny understand he would not be 
pleased by her remarrying, not because he was jealous of her, 
but because he was jealous of his position as a frther. He had 
atraitged the money to be paid to her so it would be enor- 
mously to her advantage ^andally not to remarry.. It was 
understood that she could have lovers as long as they were not 
introduced into her home life. But on this score 1 ^ had ab- 
solute ftddi in her. She had aiwa3r8 been amazingly shy and 

168 



old-fiishiooed in sex. The Hollywood gigolos had batted ztto 
when they started swarming around her, snifHng for the 
fifiAnrial settlement and the favours they could get from her 
famous husband. 

He had no fear that she expected a reconciliation because he 
had wanted to sleep with her the night before. Neither one of 
them wanted to renew their old marriage. She understood his 
hunger for beauty, his irresistible impulse towards young 
women far more beautiful than she. It was known that he 
always slept with his movie co-stars at least once. His boyish 
charm was irresistible to them, as their beauty was to him. 

‘You’ll have to start getting dressed pretty soon,’ Ginny 
said. ‘Tom’s plane will be getting in.’ She shooed the 
daughters out of the room. 

‘Yeah,’ Johnny said. ‘By the way, Ginny, you know I’m 
getting divorced? I’m gonna be a free man again.’ 

She watched him getting dressed. He always kept fresh 
clothes at her house ever since they had come to their new 
arrangement after the wedding of Don Corleone’s daughter. 
‘Christmas is only two weeks away,’ she said. ‘Shall I plan on 
you being here?’ 

It was the first time he had even thought about the holidays. 
When his voice was in shape, holidays were lucrative singing 
dates but even then Christmas was sacred. If he missed this 
one, it would be the second one. Last year he had been court- 
ing his second wife in Spain, trying to get her to marry him. 

‘Yeah,’ he said. ‘Christmas Eve and Christmas.’ He didn’t 
mention New Year’s Eve. That would be one of the wild 
nights he needed every once in a while, to get drunk with his 
friends, and he didn’t want a wife along then. He didn't feel 
guilty about it. 

She helped him put on his jacket and brushed it off. He was 
always fastidiously neat. She could see him frowning because 
the shirt he had put on was not laundered to his taste, the cuff 
links, a pair he had not worn for some time, were a little too 
loud for the way he liked to dress now. She laughed softly and 
said, ‘Tom won’t notice the difference.’ 

llie three women of the funily walked him to the door and 
out on the driveway to his car. The two little girls held his* 

169 



hands, one on each side. His wife walked a little behind him. 
She was getting pleasure out of how happy he looked. When 
he reached his car he turned around and swung each girl in 
turn high up in the air and kissed her on the way down. Then 
he kissed his wife and got into the car. He never liked drawn- 
out goodbyes. 

Arrangements had been made by his PR man and aide. At 
his house a chauffeured car was waiting, a rented car. In it 
were the PR man and another member of his entourage. 
Johnny parked his car and hopped in and they were on their 
way to the airport. He waited inside the car while the PR man 
went out to meet Tom Hagen’s plane. When Tom got into the 
car they shook hands and drove back to his house. 

Finally he and Tom were alone in the living room. There 
was a coolness between them. Johnny had never forgiven 
Hagen for acting as a barrier to his getting in touch with the 
Don when the Don was angry with him, in those bad days 
before Connie’s wedding. Hagen never made excuses for his 
actions. He could not. It was part of his job to act as a light- 
ning rod for resentments which people were too awed to feel 
towards the Don himself though he had earned them. 

‘Your Godfather sent me out here to give you a hand on 
some things,’ Hagen said. ‘I wanted to get it out of the way 
before Christmas.’ 

Johnny Fontanc shrugged. ‘The picture is finished. The 
director was a square guy and treated me right. My scenes are 
too important to be left on the cutdng-room floor just for 
Woltz to pay me off. He can’t ruin a ten-million-dollar picture. 
So now everything depends on how good people think I am in 
the mqvie.’ 

Hagen said cautiously, ‘ Is winning this Academy Award so 
terribly important to an actor’s career, or is it just the usual 
publicity crap that really doesn’t mean anything one way or 
the other?’ He paused and added hastily, ‘Except of course 
the glory, everybody likes glory.’ 

Johnny Fontane grinned at him. ‘Except my Godfather. 
And you. No, Tom, it’s not a lot of crap. An Academy Award 
can make an actor for ten years. He can get his pick of roles. 


170 



The public goes to see him. It^s not everything, but for an 
actor it*s the most important thing in the business. Fm count- 
ing on winning it. Not because Fm such a great actor but 
because I’m known primarily as a singer and the part is fool- 
proof. And Fm pretty good too, no kidding.* 

Tom Hagen shrugged and said, ‘Your Godfather tells me 
that the way things stand now, you don’t have a chance of 
winning the award.* 

Johnny Fontanc was angry. ‘What the hell are you talking 
about? llie picture hasn’t even been cut yet, much less shown. 
And the Don isn’t even in the movie business. Why the hell 
did you fly the three thousand miles just to tell me that shit?* 
He was so shaken he was almost in tears. 

Hagen said worriedly, ‘Johnny, I don’t know a damn thing 
about all this movie stuff. Remember, Fm just a messenger boy 
for the Don. But we have discussed this whole business of 
yours many times. He worries about you, about your future. 
He feels you still need his help and he wants to settle your 
problem once and for all. That’s why Fm here now, to get 
things rolling. But you have to start growing up, Johnny. You 
have to stop thinking about yourself as a singer or an actor. 
You’ve got to start thinking about yourself as a prime mover, 
as a guy with muscle,* 

Johnny Fontane laughed and filled his glass. ‘If 1 don’t win 
that Oscar I’ll have as much muscle as one of my daughters. 
My voice is gone; if I had that back I could make some moves. 
Oh, hell. How docs my Godfather know I won’t win it? 
OK. I believe he knows. He’s never been wrong.’ 

Hagen lit a thin cigar. ‘We got the word that Jack Woltz 
won’t spend studio money to support your candidacy. In fact 
he’s sent the word out to everybody who votes that he does 
not want you to win. But holding back the money for ads and 
all that may do it. He’s also arranging to have one other guy 
get as much of the opposition votes as he can swing. He’s 
using all sorts of bribes - jobs, money, broads, everything. 
And he’s trying to do it without hurting the picture or hurting 
it as little as possible.’ 

Johnny Fontane shrugged. He filled his glass with whisky 
and downed it. ‘Then I’m dead.’ 



Hagen waa watching him widi his mouth cuded up with 
distaste. * Drinking won’t help your voice/ he said. 

‘Fuck you/ Johnny said. 

Hagen’s face suddenly became smoothly impassive. Then he 
said, ‘OK, I’ll keep this purely business.’ 

Johnny Fontane put his drink down and went over to stand 
in front of Hagen. ‘I’m sorry I said that, Tom,’ he said. 
‘Qirist, I’m sorry. I’m taking it out on you because I wanta 
kill that bastard Jack Woltz and I’m afraid to tell off my God- 
frther. So I get sore at you.’ There were tears in his eyes. He 
threw the empty whisky glass against the wall but so weakly 
that the heavy shot glass did not even shatter and rolled along 
the floor back to him so that he looked down at it in baffled 
fury. Then he laughed. ‘Jesus Christ,’ he said. 

He walked over to the other side of the room and sat 
opposite Hagen. ‘You know, I had everything my own way 
for a long time. Then I divorced Ginny and everything started 
going sour. I lost my voice. My records stopped selling. I 
didn’t get any more movie work. And then my Godfather got 
sore at me and wouldn’t talk to me on the phone or see me 
when I came into New York. You were always the guy 
barring the path and I blamed you, but I knew you wouldn’t 
do it without orders from the Don. But you can’t get sore at 
him. It’s like getting sore at God. So I curse you. But you’ve 
been tight all along the line. And to show you I mean my 
apology I’m taking your advice. No more booze until I get 
my voice back. OK?’ 

The apology was sincere. Hagen forgot his anger. There 
must be something to this thirty-five-year-old boy or the 
Don would not be so fond of him. He said, ‘Forget it, Johnny.’ 
He was embarrassed at the depth of Johnny’s feeling and 
embarrassed by the suspicion that it might have been in- 
spired by fear, fear that he might turn the Don against him. 
And of course the Don could never be turned by any- 
one for any reason. His affection was mutable o^y by 
himself. 

‘Things aren’t so bad,’ he told Johnny. ‘The Don says he 
can cancel out everything Woltz does against you. That you 
will almost certainly win the Award. But he f(^8 that won’t 



solve your problem. He wants to know if you have the brains 
and b^s to become a producer on your own, make your own 
movies from top to bottom.* 

‘How the hell is he going to get me the Award?’ Johnny 
asked incredulously. 

Hagen said sharply, ‘How do you find it so easy to believe 
that Woltz can finagle it and your Godfather can’t? Now since 
it’s necessary to get your faith for the other part of our deal I 
must tell you this. Just keep it to yourself. Your Godfather is a 
much more powerful man than Jack Woltz. And he is much 
more powerfol in areas far more critical. How can he swing the 
Award? He controls, or controls the people who control, all 
the labour unions in the industry, all the people or nearly all 
the people who vote. Of course you have to be good, you 
have to be in contention on your own merits. And your God- 
father has more brains than Jack Woltz. He doesn’t go up to 
these people and put a gun to their heads and say, ‘“Vote for 
Johnny Fontane or you are out of a job.” He doesn’t strong- 
arm where strong-arm doesn’t work or leaves too many hard 
feelings. He’ll make those people vote for you because they 
want to. But they won’t want to unless he takes an interest. 
Now just take my word for it that he can get you the Award. 
And that if he doesn’t do it, you won’t get it.’ 

*OK,’ Johnny said. ‘I believe you. And I have the balls and 
brains to be a producer but 1 don’t have the money. No bank 
would finance me. It takes millions to support a movie.’ 

Hagen said dryly, ‘When you get the Award, start making 
plans to produce three of your own movies. Hire the best 
people in the business, the best technicians, the best stars, 
whoever you need. Plan on three to five movies^’ 

‘You’re crazy,’ Johnny said. ‘That many movies could 
mean twenty million bucks.’ 

‘When you need the money,’ Hagen said, ‘get in touch with 
me. I’ll give you the name of the bank out here in California to 
ask for financing. Don’t worry, they finance movies all the 
time. Just ask them for the money in the ordinary way, with 
the proper justifications, like a regular business deal. They will 
approve, l^t first you have to see me and tell me the figures 
and the plans. OK?’ 


-173 



Johnny was silent for a long time. Then he said quietly, *Is 
there anything else?’ 

IJagen smiled. *You mean, do you have to do any &vours 
in return for a loan of twenty million dollars? Sure you will.’ 
He waited for Johnny to say something. ‘Nothing you 
wouldn’t do anyway if the Don asked you to do it for him.’ 

Johnny said, ‘The Don has to ask me himself if it’s some- 
thing serious, you know what I mean? I won’t take your word 
or Sonny’s for it.’ 

Hagen was surprised by this good sense. Fontane had some 
brains after all- He had sense to know that the Don was too 
fond of him, and too smart, to ask him to do something 
foolishly dangerous, whereas Sonny might. He said to 
Johnny, ‘Let me reassure you on one thing. Your Godfather 
has given me and Sonny strict instructions not to involve you 
in any way in anything that might get you bad publicity 
through our fault. And he will never do that himself. I 
guarantee you that any favour he asks of you, you will offer 
to do before he requests it. OK?’ 

Johnny smiled. ‘OK,’ he said. 

Hagen said, ‘Also he has faith in you. He thinks you have 
brains and so he figures the bank will make money on the in- 
vestment, which means he will make money on it. So it’s 
really a business deal, never forget that. Don’t go screwing 
around with the money. You may be his favourite godson but 
twenty million bucks is a lot of dough. He has to stick his neck 
out to make sure you get it.’ 

‘Tell him not to worry,’ Johnny said. ‘If a guy like Jack 
Wolt2 can be a big movie genius, anybody can.’ 

‘ That’s what your Godfather figures,’ Hagen said. ‘ Can you 
have me driven back to the airport? I’ve said aU I have to say. 
When you do start signing contracts for everjrthing, hire your 
own lawyers, I won’t be in on it. But I’d like to see everything 
before you sign,.if that’s OK with you. Also, you’ll never have 
any labour troubles. That will cut costs on your pictures to 
some extent, so when the accountants lump some of that in, 
disregard those figures.’ 

Johnny said cautiously, ‘Do I have to get your OK on any- 
thing else, scripts, stars, any of that?’ 


174 



Hagen shook his head. ‘No/ he said. ‘It may happen that 
the Don would object to something but he’ll object to you 
direct if he docs. But 1 can’t imagine what that would be. 
Movies don’t affect him at all, in any way, so he has no intetest. 
And he doesn’t believe in meddling, that I can tell you from 
experience.’ 

‘Good/ Johnny said, ‘I’ll drive you to the airport myself. 
And thank the Godfather for me. I’d call him up and thank 
him but he never comes to the phone. Why is that, by the 
way?’ 

Hagen shrugged. ‘He hardly ever talks on the phone. He 
doesn’t want his voice recorded, even saying something 
perfectly innocent. He’s afraid that they can splice the words 
together so that it sounds as if he says something else. 1 think 
that’s what it is. Anyway his only worry is that someday he’ll 
be framed by the authorities. So he doesn’t want to give them 
an edge.’ 

They got into Johnny’s car and drove to the airport. Hagen 
was thinking that Johnny was a better guy than he figured. 
He’d already learned something, just his driving him per- 
sonally to the airport proved that. The personal courtesy, 
something the Don himself always believed in. And the 
apology. That had been sincere. He had known Johnny a long 
time and he knew the apology would never be made out of 
feat. Johnny had always had guts. That’s why he had always 
been in trouble, with his movie bosses and with his women. 
He was also one of the few people who was not afraid of the 
Don. Fontane and Michael were maybe the only two men 
Hagen knew of whom this could be said. So the apology was 
sincere, he would accept it as such. He and Johnqy would have 
to sec a lot of each oihet in the next few years. And Johnny 
would have to pass the next test, which would prove how 
smart he was. He would have to do something for the Don 
that the Don would never ask him to do or insist that he do as 
part of the agreement. Hagen wondered if Johnny Fontane 
was smart enough to figure out that part of the bargain. 

After Johnny dropped Hagen off at the airport (Hagen 
insisted that Johnny not hang around for his plane with bim) 


*75 



he drove back to Glnny'a house. She was surprised to see him. 
But he wanted to stay at her place so that he would have time 
to think things out, to make his plans. He knew that what 
Hagen had told him was extremely important, that his whole 
life was being changed. He had once been a big star but now at 
the young age of thirty-five he was washed up. He didn’t kid 
himself about that. Even if he won the Award as best actor, 
what the hell could it mean at the most? Nothing, if his voice 
didn’t come back. He’d be just second-rate, with no real 
power, no real juice. Even that girl turning him down, she had 
been nice and smart and acting sort of hip, but would she have 
been so cool if he had really been at the top? Now with the 
Don backing him with dough he could be as big as anybody in 
Hollywood. He could be a king. Johnny smiled. Hell. He 
could even be a Don. 

It would be nice living with Giony again for a few weeks, 
maybe longer. He’d take the kids out every day, maybe have a 
few friends over. He’d stop drinking and smoking, really take 
care of himself. Maybe his voice would get strong again. If 
that happened and with the Don’s money, he’d be unbeatable. 
He’d really be as close to an old-time king or emperor as it 
was possiNe to be in America. And it wouldn’t depend on his 
voice holding up or how long the public cared about him as an 
actor. It would be an empire rooted in money and the most 
special, the most coveted kind of power. 

Ginny had the guest bedroom made up for him. It was 
understood that he would not share her room, that they would 
not live as man and wife. They could never have that teladon- 
ship again. And though the outside world of gossip columnists 
and n^ovie fims gave the blame for the failure of their marriage 
solely to him, yet in a curious way, between the two of them, 
they both knew that she was even more to blame for their 
divorce. 

When Johnny Fontane became the most popular singer and 
movie musical comedy star in motion pictures, it had never 
occurred to him to desert his wife and children. He was too 
Italian, sdll too old-style. Naturally he had been unfiuthful. 
That had been impossible to avoid in his business and the 
temptations to which he was continually exposed. And de fitf 

176 



being a skinny, delicate-looking guy, he had the wiry hotoi- 
ness of many small-boned Latin types. And women delighted 
him in their surprises. He loved going out with a demure 
sweet-faced virginal-looking girl and then uncapping her 
breasts to find them so unexpectedly slopingly full and rich, 
lewdly heavy in contrast to the cameo face. He loved to find 
sexual shyness and timidity in the sexy-looking girls who were 
all fake motion like a shifty basketball player, vamping as if 
they had slept with a hundred guys, and then when he got 
them alone having to battle for hours to get in and do the job 
and finding out they were virgins. 

And all these Hollywood guys laughed at his fondness for 
virgins. They called it an old guinea taste, square, and look 
how long it took to make a virgin give you a blow job with all 
the aggravation and then they usually turned out to be a lousy 
piece of ass. But Johnny knew that it was how you handled a 
young girl. You had to come or to her the right way and then 
what could be greater than a girl who was tasting her first 
dick and loving it? Ah, it was so great breaking them in. It 
was so great having them wrap their legs around you. Their 
thighs were all different shapes, their asses were different, their 
skins were all different colours and shades of white and brown 
and tan and when he had slept with that young coloured girl 
in Detroit, a good girl, not a hustler, the young daughter of a 
jstzz singer on the same nightclub bill with him, she had been 
one of ^e sweetest things he had ever had. Her lips had really 
tasted like warm honey with pepper mixed in it, her dark 
brown skin was rich, creamy, and she had been as sweet as 
God had ever made any woman and she had been a virgin. 

And the other guys were always talking abouj: blow jobs 
this and other variations and he re^y didn’t enjoy that stuff so 
much. He never liked a girl that much after they tried it that 
way, it just didn’t satisfy him right. He and his second wife 
had finally not got along because she preferred the old sixty- 
nine too much to a point where she didn’t want anything else 
and he had to fight to stick it in. She began making fun of him 
and calling him a square and the word got around that he 
made love like a kid. Maybe that was why that girl last night 
had turned him down. Well, the hell with it, she wouldn’t be 


*77 



too great in the sack anyway. You could tell a girl who really 
liked to fuck and they were always the best. Especially the 
ones who hadn’t been at it too long. What he really hated were 
the ones who had started screwing at twelve and were all 
fucked out by the time they were twenty and just going 
through the motions and some of them were the prettiest of 
all and could fake you out. 

Ginny brought coffee and cake into his bedroom and put it 
on the long table in the sitting room part. He told her simply 
that Hagen was helping him put together the money credit for 
a producing package and she was excited about that. He 
would be important again. But she had no idea of how power- 
ful Don Corleone really was so she didn’t understand the 
significance of Hagen coming from New York. He told her 
Hagen was also helping with legal details. 

When they had finished the coffee he told her he was going 
to work that night, and make phone calls and plans for the 
future. ‘Half of all this will be in the kids’ names,’ he told her. 
She gave him a grateful smile and kissed him goodnight 
before she left his room. 

There was a glass dish full of his favourite monogrammed 
cigarettes, a humidor with pencil-thin black Cuban cigars on 
his writing desk. Johnny tilted back and started making calls. 
His brain was really whirring along. He called the author of 
the book, the best-selling novel, on which his new film was 
based. The author was a guy his own age who had come up the 
hard way and was now a celebrity in the literary world. He had 
come out to flollywood expecting to be treated like a wheel 
and, like most authors, had been treated like shit. Johnny had 
seen the humiliation of the author one night at the Brown 
Derby. The writer had been fixed up with a well-known 
< bosomy starlet for a date on the town and a sure shack-up later. 
But while they were at dinner the starlet had deserted the famous 
author because a ratty-looking movie comic had waggled his 
finger at her. That had given the writer the right slant on just 
who was who in the Hollywood pecking order. It didn’t matter 
that his book had made him world famous,. A starlet would 
prefer the crummiest, the rattiest, the phoniest movie wheel. 

Now Johnny called the author at his New York home to 

178 



thank him for the great part he had written in his book for 
him. He flattered the shit out of the guy. Then casually he 
asked him how he was doing on his next novel and what it was 
all about. He lit a cigar while the author told him about a 
specially interesting chapter and then finally said, ‘Gee, I*d 
like to read it when you’re finished. How about sending me a 
copy ? Maybe I can get you a good deal for it, better than you 
got with Woltz.’ 

The eagerness in the author’s voice told him that he had 
guessed right. Woltz had chiselled the guy, given him peanuts 
for the book. Johnny mentioned that he might be in New 
York right after the holidays and would the author want to 
come and have dinner with some of his friends. ‘I know a few 
good-looking broads,* Johnny said jokingly. The author 
laughed and said OK. 

Next Johnny ^called up the director and cameraman on the 
film he had just finished to thank them for having helped him 
in the film. He told them confidentially that he knew Woltz 
had been against him and he doubly appreciated their help and 
that if there was ever anything he could do for them they 
should just call. 

'Fhen he made the hardest call of all, the one to Jack Woltz. 
He thanked him for the part in the picture and told him how 
happy he would be to work for him any time. He did this 
merely to throw Woltz off the track. He had always been very 
square, very straight. In a few days Woltz would find out 
about this manoeuvring and be astounded by the treachery of 
this call, which was exactly what Johnny Fontane wanted him 
to feel. 

After that he sat at the desk and puffed at his cigar. There 
was whisky on a side table but he had made some sort of 
promise to himself and Hagen that he wouldn’t drink. He 
shouldn’t even be smoking. It was foolish; whatever was 
wrong with his voice probably wouldn’t be helped by knock- 
ing off drinking and smoking. Not too much, but what the 
hell, it might help and he wanted all the percentages with him, 
now that he had a fighting chance. 

Now with the house quiet, his divorced wife sleeping, his 
beloved daughters sleeping, he could think back to that 


*79 



tetfible time in his life when he had deserted them. Deserted 
them for a whore tramp of a bitch who was his second wife. 
But even now he smiled at the thought of her, she was such a 
lovely broad in so many ways and, besides, the only thing that 
saved his life was the day that he had made up his mind never 
to hate a woman or, more specifically, the day he had decided 
he could not afford to hate his first wife and his daughters, his 
girlfriends, his second wife, and the girlfriends after that, 
light up to Sharon Moore brushing him off so that she could 
htSLg about refusing to screw for the great Johnny Fontane. 

He had travelled with the band singing and then he had 
become a radio star and a star of the movie stage shows and 
then he had finally made it in the movies. And in all that time 
he had lived the way he wanted to, screwed the women he 
wanted to, but4ie had never let it affe^ his personal life. Then 
he had fallen for his soon-to-be second wife, Margot Ashton; 
he had gone absolutely crazy for her. His career had gone to 
hell, his voice had gone to h^, his fiuxiily life had gone to hell. 
And there had come the day when he was left without 
anything. 

The thing was, he had always been generous and fair. He 
had given his first wife everything he owned when be di- 
vorced her. He had made sure his. two daughters would get a 
piece of everything he made, every record, every movie, every 
dub date. And when he had been rich and famous he had 
refused his first wife nothing. He had helped out aU her 
brothers and sisters, her father and mother, the girlfriends 
she had gone to school with and their families. He had never 
been a stuck-up celebnty. He had sung at the weddings of his 
wife’s two younger sisters, something he hated to do. He had 
never refused her anything except the complete surrender of 
his own personality. 

And then when he had touched bottom, when he could no 
longer get movie work, when he could no longer sing, when 
his second wife had betrayed him, he had gone to spend a few 
days with Ginny and his ^ughters. He had more or less flung 
himself on her mercy one night because he felt so lousy. That 
day he had heard one of his recordings and he had sounded so 

i8o 



terrible that he accused the sound technidaiis of sabotuging 
the record. Until finally he had become convinced tibat that 
was what his voice really sounded like. He had smashed the 
master record and refused to sing any more. He was so ashamed 
that he had not sung a note except with Nino at Connie 
Corleone’s wedding. 

He had never forgotten the look on Ginny^s face when she 
found out about all his misfortunes. It had passed over her 
face only for a second but that was enough for him never to 
forget it. It was a look of savage and joyful satisfaction. It was 
a look that could only make him believe that she had contemp- 
tuously hated him all these years. She quickly recovered and 
offered him cool but polite sympathy. He had pretended to 
accept it. During the next few days he had gone to see three of 
the gills he had liked the most over the years, girls he had 
remained friends with and sometimes st^ slept with in a 
comradely way, gkls that he had done everything in his power 
to help, girls to whom he had given the equivalent of hundreds 
of thousands of dollars in gifts or job opportunities. On their 
faces he had* caught that same fleeting look of savage satis- 
faction. 

It was during that time that he knew he had to make a 
decision. He could become like a great many other men in 
Holl3rwood, successful producers, writers, directors, actors, 
who preyed on beautiful women with lustful hatred. He could 
use power and monetary favours grudgingly, always alert 
for treason, always believing that women would betray and 
desert him, adversaries to be bested. Or he could refuse to hate 
women and continue to believe in them. 

He knew he could not afford not to love them, that some- 
thing of his spirit would die if he did not continue to love 
women no matter how treacherous and unfidthful they ware. 
It didn’t matter that the women he loved most in the world 
were secretly glad to see him crushed, humiliated, by a way- 
ward fortune ; it did not matter that in the most awful way, not 
sexually, they had been unfaithful to him. He had no choice. 
He had to accept them. And so he made love to all of them, 
gave them presents, hid the hurt their enjoyment of his mis- 
fortunes gave him. He forgave them knowing he was being 

i8i 



paid back for having lived in the utmost freedom from women 
and in the fullest flush of their flavour. But now he never felt 
guilty about being untrue to them. He never felt guilty about 
how he treated Ginny, insisting on remaining the sole father 
of his children, yet never even considering remarrying her, 
and letting her know that too. That was one thing he had 
salvaged out of his fall from the top. He had grown a thick 
skin about the hurts he gave women. 

He was tired and ready for bed but one note of memory 
stuck with him: singing with Nino Valenti. And suddenly he 
knew what would please Don Corleone more than anything 
else. He picked up the phone and told the operator to get him 
New York. He called Sonny Corleone and asked him for 
Nino Valenti’s number. Then he called Nino. Nino sounded a 
little drunk as usual. 

‘ Hey, Nino, how’d you like to come out here and work for 
me,’ Johnny said. ‘I need a guy I can trust.’ 

Nino, kidding arotind, said, ‘Gee, I don’t know, Johnny, I 
got a good job on the truck, bofling housewives along my 
route, picking up a clear hundred-fifty every week. What you 
got tO' offer?* 

* 1 can start you at five hundred and get you blind dates with 
movie stars, how’s that?’ Johnny said. 'And maybe I’ll let you 
sing at my parties.’ 

‘ Yeah, OK, let me think about it,’ Nino said. 'Let me talk it 
over with my lawyer and my accountant and my helper on the 
truck.’ 

‘Hey, no kidding around, Nino,’ Johnny said. 'I need you 
out here. I want you to fly out tomorrow morning and sign a 
personal contract for five hundred a week for a year. Then if 
you steal one of my broads and I fire you, you pick up at least a 
year’s salary. OK?’ 

There was a long pause. Nino’s voice was sober. ‘Hey, 
Johnny, you kidding?’ 

Johnny said, ‘I’m serious, kid. Go to my agent’s office in 
New York. They’ll have your plane ticket and some cash. I’m 
gonna call them first thing in the morning. So you go up there 
in the afternoon. OK? Then I’ll have somebody meet you at 
the plane and bring you out to the house.’ 

182 



Again there was a long pause and then Ninons voice, very 
subdued, uncertain, said, ‘OK, Johnny/ He didn’t sound 
drunk any more. 

Johnny hung up the phone and got ready for bed. He felt 
better than any time since he had smashed that master record. 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 


joHNNYFoNTANKsatin the huge recording studio and figured 
costs on a yellow pad. Musicians were filing in, all of them 
friends he had known since he was a kid singer with the 
bands. The conductor, top man in the business of pop accom- 
paniment and a man who had been kind to him when things 
went sour, was giving each musician bundles of music and 
verbal instructions. His name was Eddie Neils. He had taken 
on this recording as a favour to Johnny, though his schedule 
was crowded. 

Nino Valenti was sitting at a piano fooling around ner- 
vously with the keys. He was also sipping from a huge glass of 
rye. Johnny didn’t mind that. He knew Nino sang just as well 
drunk as sober and what they were doing today wouldn’t 
require any real musicianship on Nino's part. 

Eddie Neils had made special arrangements of some old 
Italian and Sicilian songs, and a special job on the duel-duet 
song that Nino and Johnny had sung at Connie Corleone’s 
wedding. Johnny was making the record primarily because he 
knew that the Don loved such songs and it would be a perfect 
Christmas, gift for him. He also had a hunch that the record 
would sell in the high numbers, not a million, of course. And 
he had figured out that helping Nino was how the Don wanted 
his payoff. Nino was, after all, another one of the Don's god- 
children. 

Johnny put his clipboard and yellow pad on the folding 
chair beside him and got up to stand beside the piano. He said, 
‘Hey, paisan* and Nino glanced up and tried to smile. He 
looked a little sick. Johnny leaned over and rubbed his 

183 



shoulder blades. *Relax, kid,* he said. ‘Do a good job today 
and rii fix you up with the best and most famous piece of ass 
ill Hollywood.’ 

Nino took a gulp of whisky. ‘Who’s that. Lassie?’ 

Johnny laughed. ‘No, Deanna Dunn. I guarantee the 
goods.* 

Nino was impressed but couldn’t help saying with pseudo- 
hopefulness, ‘You can’t get me Lassie?’ 

The orchestra swung into the opening song of the medley. 
Johnny Fontane listened intently. Eddie Neils would play all 
the songs through in their special arrangements. Then would 
come the first take for the record. As Johnny listened he made 
mental notes on exactly how he would handle each phrase, 
how he would come into each song. He knew his voice 
wouldn’t last long, but Nino would be doing most of the 
singing, Johnny would be singing under him. Except of 
course in the duet-duel song. He would have to save himself 
for that. 

He pulled Nino to his feet and they both stood by their 
microphones. Nino flubbed the opening, flubbed it again. His 
face was beginning to get red with embarrassment. Johnny 
kidded him, ‘Hey, you stalling for overtime?’ 

‘I don’t feel natund without my mandolin,’ Nino said. 

Johnny thought that over for a moment. ‘Hold that glass of 
hoo 2 c in your hand,’ he said. 

It seemed to do the trick. Nino kept drinking from the glass 
as he sang but he was doing fine. Johnny sang easily, not 
straining, his voice merely dancing around Nino’s main 
melody. There was no emotional satis^ction in this kind of 
singing but he was amazed at his own technical skill. Ten 
years of vocalizing had taught him something. 

When, they came to the duet-duel song that ended the 
record, Johnny let his voice go and when they finished his 
vocal chords ached. The musicians had been carried away by 
the last song, a rare thing for these calloused veterans. They 
hammered down their instruments and 8tanq>ed their feet in 
approval as applause. The drummer gave diem a ruffle of 
dnims. 

With stops and conferences they worked nearly four hours 

184 



before they quit. Eddie Neils came over to Johnny and said 
quietly, ‘You sounded pretty good, kid. Maybe you’re ready to 
do a record. I have a new song that’s perfect for you.’ 

Johnny shook his head. ‘Come on, Eddie, don’t kid me. 
Besides in a couple of hours I’ll be too hoarse to even talk. Do 
you think we’ll have to fix up much of the stuff we did today?* 

Eddie said thoughtfully, ‘Nino will have to come into the 
studio tomorrow. He made some mistakes. But he’s much 
better than 1 thought he would be. As for your stuff. I’ll have 
the sound engineers fix anything I don’t like. OK?’ 

‘OK,’ Jolmny said. ‘When can I hear the pressing?’ 

‘Tomorrow night,’ Eddie Neils said. ‘Your place?’ 

‘Yeah,’ Johnny said. ‘Thanks, Eddie. See you tomorrow.’ 
He took Nino by the arm and walked out of the studio. They 
went to his house instead of Ginny’s. 

By this time it was late afternoon. Nino was still more than 
half-drunk. Johnny told him to get under the shower and 
then take a snooze. They had to be at a big party at eleven that 
night. 

When Nino woke up, Johnny briefed him. ‘This party is a 
movie star Lonely Hearts Qub,’ he said. ‘These broads to- 
night are dames you’ve seen in the movies as glamour queens 
millions of guys would give their right arms to screw. And the 
only reason they’ll be at the party tonight is to find somebody 
to shack them up. Do you know why? Because they are 
hungry for it, they are just a little old. And just like every 
dame, they want it with a little bit of class.’ 

‘ What's the matter with your voice ? ’ Nino asked. 

Johnny had been speaking almost in a whisper. ‘Every 
time after 1 sing a little bit that happens. 1 won’t be able to 
sing for a month now. But I’ll get over the hoarseness in a 
couple of days.’ 

Nino said thoughtfully, ‘Tough, huh?’ 

Johnny shrugged. ‘Listen, Nino, don’t get too drunk to- 
night. You have to show these Hollywood broads that my 
paisan buddy ain’t weak in the poop. You gotta come across. 
Remember, some of these dames are very powerful in movies,, 
they can get you work. It doesn’t hurt to be charming after 
you knock off a piece.’ 


185 



Nino was already pouring himself a diink. always 
charming/ he said. He drained the glass. Grinning, he asked. 
‘No kidding, can you really get me close to Deanna Dunn?’ 

‘Don’t be so anxious/ Johnny said. ‘It’s not going to be 
like you think.’ 

The Hollywood Movie Star Lonely Hearts Club (so called 
by the young juvenile leads whose attendance was mandatory) 
met every Friday night at the palatial, studio-owned home of 
Roy McElroy, press agent or rather public relations counsel 
for the Woltz International Film Corporation. Actually, 
though it was McElroy’s open house party, the idea had come 
from the practical brain of Jack Woltz himself. Some of his 
money-making movie stars were getting older now. Without 
the help of special lights and genius makeup men they looked 
their age. They were having problems. They had also become, 
to some extent, desensitized physically and mentally. They 
could no longer ‘fall in love’. They could no longer assume 
the role of hunted women. They had been made too imperious; 
by money, by fame, by their former beauty, Woltz gave his 
parties so that it would be easier for them to pick up lovers, 
one-night stands, who, if they had the stuff, could graduate 
into full-time bed partners and so work their way upward. 
Since the action sometimes degenerated into brawls or sexual 
excess that led to trouble with the police, Woltz decided to 
hold the parties in the house of the public relations counsellor, 
who would be right there to fix things up, pay off newsmen 
and police officers and keep everything quiet. 

For certain virile young male actors on the studio payroll 
who had not yet achieved stardom or featured roles, atten- 
dance at the Friday night parties was a not always pleasant 
duty. This was explained by the fact that a new film yet to be 
released by the studio would be shown at the party. In fact that 
was the excuse for the party itself. People would say, ‘Let’s go 
over to see what the new picture so and so made is like.’ And 
so it was put in a professional context. 

Young female starlets were forbidden to attend the Friday 
night parties. Or rather discouraged. Most of them took the 
hint. 


i86 



Screenings of the new movies took place at midnight and 
johnny and Nino arrived at eleven. Roy McElroy proved to 
be, at first sight, an enormously likeable man, well-groomed, 
beautifully dressed. He greeted Johnny Fontane with a sur- 
prised cry of delight. *What the hell are you doing here?* he 
said with genuine astonishment. 

Johnny shook his hand. ‘I’m showing my country cousin 
the sights. Meet Nino.’ 

McElroy shook hands with Nino and gazed at him ap- 
praisingly. ‘They’ll eat him up alive/ he said to Johnny. He 
led them to the rear patio. 

The rear patio was really a series of huge rooms whose glass 
doors had been opened to a garden and pool. There were 
almost a hundred people milling around, all with drinks in 
their hands. The patio lighting was artfully arranged to flatter 
feminine faces and skin. These were women Nino had seen on 
the darkened movie screens when he had been a teenager. 
They had played their part in his erotic dreams of adolescence. 
But seeing them now in the flesh was like seeing them in some 
horrible makeup. Nothing could hide the tiredness of their 
spirit and their flesh; time had eroded their godhead. They 
posed and moved as charmingly as he remembered but they 
were like wax fruit, they could not lubricate his glands. Nino 
took two drinks, wandered to a table where he could stand 
next to a nest of bottles. Johnny moved with him. They drank 
together until behind them came the magic voice of Deanna 
Dunn. 

Nino, like millions of other men, had that voice imprinted on 
his brain forever. Deanna Dunn had won two Academy 
Awards, had been in the biggest movie grosser made in Holly- 
wood. On the screen she had a feline feminine 'charm that 
made her irresistible to all men. But the words she was saying 
had never been heard on the silver screen. ‘Johnny, you 
bastard, I had to go to my psychiatrist again because you gave 
me a one-night stand. How come you never came back for 
seconds?’ 

Johnny kissed her on her proflered cheek. ‘You wore me 
out for a month,’ he said. ‘ I want you to meet my cousin Nino. 
A nice strong Italian boy. Maybe he can keep up with you.’ 

187 



Deanna Dunn turned to give Nino a cool look. ‘Does he 
like to watch previews?’ 

Johnny laughed. don’t think he’s ever had the chance. 
Why don’t you break him in?’ 

Nino had to take a big drink when he was alone with 
Deanna Dunn. He was trying to be nonchalant but it was hard. 
Deanna Dunn had the upturned nose, the clean-^nit classical 
features of the AnglchSazon beauty. And he knew her so well. 
He had seen her alone in a bedroom, heartbroken, weeping 
over her dead diet husband who had left her with fatherless 
children. He had seen her angry, hurt, humiliated, yet with a 
shining dignity when a caddish Qark Gable had taken ad- 
vantage of her, then left her for a scxpot. (Deanna Dunn never 
played sexpots in the movies.) He had seen her flushed with 
requited love, writhing in the embrace of the man she adored 
and he had seen her die beautifully at least a half dozen times. 
He had seen her and heard her and dreamed about her and yet 
he was not prepared for the first thing she said to him alone. 

‘Johnny is one of the few men with balls in this town,’ she 
said. ‘The rest are all fags and sick morons who couldn’t get h 
up with a broad if you pumped a truckload of Spanish fly into 
their scrotums.’ She took Nino by the hand and led him into a 
comer of the room, out of traflic and out of competition. 

Then still coolly charming, she asked him about himself. He 
saw through her. He saw that she was playing the role of the 
rich society girl who is being kind to the stableboy or the 
chauffeur, but who in the movie would either discourage his 
amatory interest (if the part were played by Spencer Tracy), or 
throw up everything in her mad desire for him (if the part were 
played by Qark Gable). But it didn’t matter. He found himself 
tellMg her about how he and Johnny had grown up together 
in New York, about how he and Johnny had sung together on 
little club dates. He found her marvellously sympathetic and 
interested. Once she asked casually, ‘Do you know how 
Johnny made that bastard Jack Woltz give him the part?’ 
Nino froze and shook his head. She didn’t pursue it. 

The time had come to see the preview of a new Woltz 
movie. Deanna Dunn led Nino, her warm hand imprisoning 
his, to an interior room of the mansion that had no windows 


i88 



bot was fu rni s h ed with about fifty stuaU two-petson couches 
scattered around in such a way as to give es^ one a little 
island of semiprivacy. 

Nino saw there was a smaU table beside the couch and on 
the table were an ice bowl, glasses, and bottles of liquor plus a 
tray of cigarettes. He gave Deanna Dunn a cigarette, lit it and 
then mixed them both drinks. They didn’t speak to each other. 
After a few minutes the lights went out. 

He had been expecting something outrageous. After all, he 
had heard the legends of Hollywood depravity. But he was not 
quite prepared for Deanna Dunn’s voracious plummet on his 
sexual organ without even a courteous and friendly word of 
preparation. He kept sipping his drink and watching the 
mode, but not tasting, not seeing. He was excited in a way he 
had never been before but part of it was because this woman 
servicing him in the dark had been the object of his adolescent 
dreams. 

Yet in a way his masculinity was insulted. So when the 
world-famous Deanna Dunn was sated and had tidied him up, 
he very coolly fixed her a fresh drink in the darkness and Ik her 
a fresh cigarette and said in the most relaxed voice imaginable, 
‘This looks like a pretty good movie.’ 

He felt her stilfen beside him on the couch. Could it be she 
was waiting for some sort of compliment? Nino poured his 
glass full from the nearest bottle his hand touched in die 
darkness. The hell with that. She’d treated him like a god- 
damn male whore. For some reason now he felt a cold anger 
at all these women. They watched the picture for another 
fifteen minutes. He leaned away from her so their bodies did 
not touch. 

Finally she said in a low harsh whisper, ‘Don’t be such a 
snotty punk, you liked it. You were as big as a house.’ 

Nino sipped his drink and said in natural off-hand 
manner, ‘That’s the way it always is. You should see it when I 
get excited.’ 

She laughed a little and kept quiet for the rest of the picture. 
Finally it was over and the lights w^nt on. Nino took a look 
around. He could sec there had been a ball here in the darkness 
though oddly enough he hadn’t heard a thing. But some of the 

189 



dames had that hard, shiny, bright-eyed look of women who 
had just been worked over real good. They sauntered out of 
the projection room. Deanna Dunn left him immediately to go 
over and talk to an older man Nino recognized as a famous 
featured player, only now, seeing the guy in person, he 
realized that he was a fag. He sipped his drink thoughtfully. 

Johnny Fontane came up ^side him and said, ‘Hi, old 
buddy, having a good time?’ 

Nino grinned. ‘I don’t know. It’s different. Now when I go 
back to the old neighbourhood 1 can say Deanna Dunn had 
me.* 

Johnny laughed. ‘She can be better than that if she invites 
you home with her. Did she?* 

Nino shook his head. ‘1 got too interested in the movie,’ he 
said. But this time Johnny didn’t laugh. 

‘ Get serious, kid,’ he said. ‘A dame like that can do you a lot 
of good. And you used to boff anything. Man, sometimes I still 
get nightmares when I remember those ugly broads you used 
to bang.’ 

Nino waved his glass drunkenly and said very loud, ‘Yeah, 
they were ugly but they were women.* Deanna Dunn, in the 
corner, turned her head to look at them. Nino waved his glass 
at her in greeting. 

Johnny Fontane sighed. *OK, you’re just a guinea peasant.' 

‘And 1 ain’t gonna change,’ Nino said with his charmingly 
drunken smile. 

Johnny understood him perfectly. He knew Nino was not as 
drunk as he pretended. He knew that Nino was only pretend- 
ing so that he could say things which he felt were too rude to 
say to his new Hollywood padrone when sober. He put his arm 
around Nino’s neck and said affectionately, ‘You wise guy 
bum, you know you got an ironclad contract for a year and 
you can say and do anything you want and I can’t fire you.’ 

‘You can’t fire me?’ Nino said with drunken cunning. 

‘No,* Johnny said. 

‘Then fuck you,’ Nino said. 

For a moment Johnny was surprised into anger. He saw the 
careless grin on Nino’s face. But in the past few years he must 
have got smarter, or his own descent from stardom had 


190 



made him more sensitive. In that moment he understood Nino, 
why his boyhood singing partner had never become successful, 
why he was trying to destroy any chance of success now. That 
Nino was reacting away from all the prices of success, that in 
some way he felt insulted by everything that was being done 
for him. 

Johnny took Nino by the arm and led him out of the house. 
Nino could barely walk now. Johnny was talking to him 
soothingly. ‘OK, kid, you just sing for me, I wanta make 
dough on you. I won't try to run your life. You do whatever 
you wanta do. OK, pMsan? All you gotta do is sing for me anc^ 
earn me money now that 1 can't sing any more. You got that, 
old buddy?’ 

Nino straightened up. ‘I’ll sing for you, Johnny,’ he said, 
his voice slurring so that he could barely be understood. ‘ I’m 
a better singer than you now. I was always a better singer than 
you, you know that?’ 

Johnny stood there thinking; so that was it. He knew that 
when his voice was healthy Nino simply wasn’t in the same 
league with him, never had been in those years they had sung 
together as kids. He saw Nino was waiting for an answer, 
weaving drunkenly in the California moonlight. ‘Fuck you,’ 
he said gently, and they both laughed together like the old days 
when they had both been equally young. 

When Johnny Fontane got word about the shooting of Don 
Corleone he not only worried about his Godfather, but also 
wondered whether the financing for his movie was still alive. 
He had wanted to go to New York to pay his respects to his 
Godfather in the hospital but he had been told not to get any 
bad publicity, that was the last thing Don Corleone would 
want. So he waited. A week later a messenget came from Tom 
Hagen. The financing was still on but for only one picture at a 
time. 

Meanwhile Johnny let Nino go his own way in Hollywood 
and California, and Nino was doing all right with the young 
starlets. Sometimes Johnny called him up for a night out to> 
gether but never leaned on him. When they talked about the 
Don getting shot, Nino said to Johnny, ‘You know, once 1 


191 



asked the Don for a job in his organmtion and he wouldn’t 
give it to me. 1 was tired of driving a truck and 1 wanted to 
make a lot of dough. You know what he told me? He says 
every man has only one destiny and that my destiny was to be 
an artist. Meaning that 1 couldn’t be a racket guy.’ 

Johnny thought that one ovtstl The Godfather must be just 
about the smartest guy in the world. He’d known imme- 
diately that Nino could never make a racket guy, would only 
get himself in trouble or get killed. Get killed with just one of 
his wisecracks. But how did the Don know that he would be 
an artist? Because, goddamn it, he figured that someday I’d 
help Nino. And how did he figure that? Because he wotild 
drop the word to me and I would try to show my gratitude. 
Of course he never asked me to do it. He just let me know it 
would make him happy if I did it. Johnny Fontane sighed. 
Now the Godfather was hurt, in trouble, and he could kiss the 
Academy Award goodbye with Woltz working against him 
and no help on his side. Only the Don had the personal con- 
tacts that could apply pressure and the Corleone Family had 
other things to think about. Johnny had ofiered to help, Hagen 
had given him a curt no. 

Johimy was busy getting his own picture going. The author 
of the book he had starred in had finished his new novel and 
"came west on Johnny’s invitation, to talk it over without 
agents or studios getting into the act. The second book was 
perfect for what Johnny wanted. He wouldn’t have to sing, it 
had a good gutsy story with plenty of dames and sex and it 
had a part that Johimy instantly recognized as tailor-made for 
Nino. The character talked like Nino, acted like him, even 
looked like him. It was uncanny. All Nino would have to do 
would be to get up on the screen and be himself. 

Johnny worked fast. He found that he knew a lot more 
about production than he thought he did, but he hired an exe- 
cutive producer, a man who knew his stuff but had trouble 
finding work because of the blacklist. Johnny didn’t take ad- 
vantage but gave the man a fair contract. * I expect you to save 
me more dough this way,’ he told the man frankly. 

So he was surprised when the executive producer came to 
him and told him the union rep had to be taken care of to die 


191 



tune of fifty thousand dollars. There were a lot of problems 
dealing with overtime and hiring and the fifty thousand 
dollars would be well spent. Johnny debated whethei the 
executive producer was husding him and then said, ‘ Send the 
union guy to me.’ 

The union guy was Billy Goffl Johnny said to him, ‘I 
thought the union stuff was i^ed by my friends. I was told not 
to worry about it. At all.’ 

Goff said, ‘Who told you that?’ 

Johnny said, ‘You know goddamn well who told me. I 
won’t say bis name but if he tells me something that’s it.’ 

Goff said, ‘Things have changed. Your friend is in trouble 
and his word don’t go this far west any more.’ 

Johnny shrugged. ‘See me in a couple of days. OK?’ 

Goff smiled. ‘Sure, Johnny,’ he said. ‘But calling in New 
York ain’t going to help you.’ 

But calling New York did help. Johnny spoke to Hagen at 
his office. Hagen told him bluntly not to pay. ‘Your God- 
father will be sore as hell if you pay that bastard a dime,’ he 
told Johnny. ‘It will make the Don lose respect and right now 
he can’t afford that.’ 

‘Can I talk to the Don?’ Johnny asked. ‘Will you talk to 
him? I gotta get the picture rolling.’ 

‘Nobody can talk to the Don right now,’ Hagen said. ‘He’s 
too sick. I’ll talk to Sonny about fixing things up. But I’ll make 
the decision on this. Don’t pay that smart bastard a dime. If 
anything changes. I’ll let you know.’ 

Annoyed, Johnny hung up. Union trouble could add a 
fortune to making the film and screw up the works generally. 
For a moment he debated slipping Goff the fifty grand on the 
quiet. After all, the Don telling him something and Hagen 
telling him something and giving him orders were two 
different things. But he decided to wait for a few days. 

By waiting he saved fifty thousand dollars. Two nights 
later, Goff was found shot to death in his home in Glendale. 
There was no more talk of \mion trouble. Johnny was a little 
shaken by the killing. It was the first time the long arm of the 
Don had struck such a lethal blow so dose to him. 

As the weeks went by and he became busier and busier with 

*93 

Godfather- 7 



getting the script ready, casting the movie, and working out 
production details, Johnny Fontane forgot about his voice, his 
not being able to sing. Yet when the Academy Award nomi- 
nations came out and he found himself one of the candidates, 
he was depressed because he was not asked to sing one of the 
songs nominated for the Oscar at the ceremony that would be 
televised nationally. But he shrugged it oflF and kept working. 
He had no hope of winning the Academy Award now that his 
Godfather was no longer able to put pressure on, but getting 
the nomination had some value. 

The record he and Nino had cut, the one of Italian songs, 
was selling much better than anything he had cut lately, but he 
knew that it was Nino’s success more than his. He resigned 
himself to never being able to again sing professionally. 

Once a week he had dinner with Ginny and the kids. No 
matter how hectic things got he never skipped that duty. But 
he didn’t sleep with Ginny. Meanwhile his second wife had 
hnagled a Mexican divorce and so he was a bachelor again. 
Oddly enough he was not that frantic to bang starlets who 
would have been easy meat. He was too snobbish really. He 
was hurt that none of the young stars, the actresses who were 
still on top, ever gave him a tumble. But it was good to work 
hard. Most nights he would go home alone, put his old records 
on the player, have a drink, and hum along with them for a 
few bars. He had been good, ^mn good. He hadn’t realized 
how good he was. Even aside from the special voice, which 
could have happened to anybody, he was good. He had been a 
real artist and never knew how much he loved it. He’d ruined 
his voice with booze and tobacco and broads just when he 
really knew what it was all about. 

Sometimes Nino came over for a drink and listened with 
him and Johnny would say to him scornfully, ‘You guinea 
bastard, you never sang like that in your Itfe.’ And Nino 
would give him that curiously charming smile and shake his 
head and say, ‘No, and I never will,’ in a sympathetic voice, as 
if he knew what Johnny was thinking. 

Finally, a week before shooting the new picture, the Aca- 
demy Award night rolled around. Johnny invited Nino to 
come along but Nino refused. Johnny said, ‘Buddy, 1 never 


194 



asked you a &vour, right? Do me a £aivour tonight and come 
with me. You’re the only guy who’ll really feel sorry for me 
if I don’t win.’ 

For one moment Nino looked startled. Then he said, ‘Sure, 
old buddy, 1 can make it.’ He paused for a moment and said, 
‘If you don’t win, forget it. Just get as drunk as you can get 
and I’ll take care of you. Hell, I won’t even drink myself to- 
night. How about that for being a buddy?’ 

‘Man,’ Johnny Fontane said, ‘that’s some buddy.’ 

The Academy Award night came and Nino kept his 
promise. He came to Johnny’s house dead sober and they left 
for the presentation theatre together. Nino wondered why 
Johnny hadn’t invited any of his girls or his ex-wives to the 
Award dinner. Especially Ginny. Didn’t he think Ginny 
would root for him? Nino wished he could have just one 
drink, it looked like a long bad night. 

Nino Valenti found the whole A cademy Award affair a bore 
imtil the winner of the best male actor was announced. When 
he heard the words ‘Johnny Fontane’, he found himself 
jumping into the air and applauding. Johnny reached out a 
hand for him to shake and Nino shook it. He knew his buddy 
needed human contact with someone he trusted and Nino felt 
an enormous sadness that Johnny didn’t have anyone better 
than himself to touch in his moment of glory. 

What followed was an absolute nightmare. Jack Woltz’s 
picture had swept all the major awards and so the studio’s 
party was swamped with newspaper people and all the on-the- 
make hustlers, male and female. Nino kept his promise to 
remain sober, and he tried to watch over Johnny. But the 
women of the party kept pulling Johnny Fontanft into bed- 
rooms for a litde chat and Johnny kept getting drunker and 
dnmker. 

Meanwhile the woman who had won the award for the best 
actress was suffering the same fate but loving it more and 
handling it better. Nino turned her down, the only man at the 
party to do so. 

Finally somebody had a great idea. The public mating of the 
two winners, everybody else at the party to be spectators in 
the stands. The actress was stripped down and the other 


195 



women started to undress Johnny Fontanc. It was then that 
Nino, the only sober person there, grabbed the half-clothed 
Johnny and slung him over his shoulder and fought his way 
out of the house and to* their car. As he drove Johnny home, 
Nino thought that if that was success, he didn’t want it. 


196 



Book in 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 


The Don was a real man at the age of twelve. Short, dark, 
slender, living in the strange Moorish-looking village of 
Corleonc in Sicily, he had been born Vito Andolini, but when 
strange men came to kill the son of the man they had murdered, 
his mother sent the young boy to America to stay with friends. 
And in the new land he changed his name to Corlcone to 
preserve some tie with his native village. It was one of the few 
gestures of sentimeht he was ever to make. 

In Sicily at the turn of the century the Mafia was the second 
government, far more powerful than the official one in Rome. 
Vito Corleone’s fathcl became involved in a feud with another 
villager who took his case to the Mafia. The father refused to 
knuckle under and in a public quarrel killed the local Mafia 
chief. A week later he himself was found dead, his body torn 
apart by lupara blasts. A month after the funeral Mafia gunmen 
came inquiring after the young boy, Vito. They had decided 
that he was too close to manhood, that he might try to avenge 
the death of his father in the years to come. The twclve-ycar- 
old Vito v/as hidden by relatives and shipped to America, 
There he was boarded with the Abbandandos, whose son 
Genco was later to become Consigliori to his Don. 

Young Vito went to work in the Abbandando grocery store 
on Ninth Avenue in New York’s Hell’s Kitchen, At the age of 
eighteen Vito married an Italian girl freshly arrived from 
Sicily, a girl of only sixteen but a skilled cook, a good house- 
wife. They setded down in a tenement on Tenth Avenue, near 
35 th Street, only a few blocks from where Vito worked, and 
two years later were blessed with their first child, Sanuno, 
called by aU his firiends Sonny because of his devotion to his 
father. 

In the neighbourhood lived a man called Fanucci. He was a 

197 



heavy-set, fierce-looking Italian who wore expensive light- 
coloured suits and a cream-coloured fedora. This man was 
reputed to be of the ‘Black Hand*, an offshoot of the Mafia 
which extorted money from families and storekeepers by 
threat of physical violence. However, since most of the in- 
habitants of the neighbourhood were violent themselves, 
Fanucci's threats of bodily harm were effective only with 
elderly couples without male children to defend them. Some 
of the storekeepers paid him trifling sums as a matter of con- 
venience. However, Fanucd was also a scavenger on fellow 
criminals, people who illegally sold Italian lottery or ran 
gambling games in their homes. The Abbandando grocery 
gave him a small tribute, this despite the protests of young 
Genco, who told his father he would settle the Fanucci hash. 
His father forbade him. Vito Corleone observed all this with- 
out feeling in any way involved. 

One day Fanucci was set upon by three young men who cut 
his throat from ear to ear, not deeply enough to kill him, but 
enough to frighten him and make him bleed a great deal. Vito 
saw Fanucci fleeing from his punishers, the circular slash 
flowing red. What he never forgot was Fanucci holding the 
cream-coloured fedora under his chin to catch the dripping 
blood as he ran. As if he did not want his suit soiled or did not 
want to leave a shameful trail of carmine. 

But this attack proved a blessing in disguise for Fanucci. 
The three young men were not murderers, merely tough 
young boys determined to teach him a lesson and stop him 
from scavenging. Fanucci proved himself a murderer. A few 
weeks later the knife-wielder was shot to death and the femilies 
of the other two young men paid an indemnity to Fanucci to 
make him forswear his vengeance. After that the tributes 
became higher and Fanucci became a partner in the neighbour- 
hood gambling games. As for Vito Corleone, it was none of 
his afiair. He forgot about it immediately. 

During World War I, when imported olive oil became 
scarce, Fanucci acquired a part-interest in the Abbandando 
grocery store by supplying it not only with oil, but imported 
Italian salami, hams, and cheeses. He then moved a nephew 
into the store and Vito Corleone found himself out of a job. 

198 



By this time, the second child, Fredetico, had arrived and 
Vito Codeone had four mouths to feed. Up to this time he had 
been a quiet, very contained young man who kept his thoughts 
to himself. The son of the grocery store owner, young Genco 
Abbandando, was his closest friend, and to the surprise of 
both of them, Vito reproached his friend for his father’s deed. 
Genco, flushed with shame, vowed to Vito that he would not 
have to worry about food. That he, Genco, would steal food 
from the grocery to supply his friend’s needs. This offer 
though was sternly refused by Vito as too shameful, a son 
stealing from his father. 

The young Vito, however, felt a cold anger for the dreaded 
Fanucci. He never showed this anger in any way but bided his 
time. He worked in the railroad for a few months and then, 
when the war ended, work became slow and he could earn 
only a few days’ pay a month. Also, most of the foremen were 
Irish and American and abused the workmen in the foulest 
language, which Vito always bore stone-faced as if he did not 
comprehend, though he understood English very well despite 
his accent. 

One evening as Vito was having supper with his family 
there was a knock on the window that led to the open air shaft 
that separated them from the next building. When Vito pulled 
aside the curtain he saw to his astonishment one of the young 
men in the neighbourhood, Peter Clemenza, leaning out from 
a window on the other side of the air shaft. He was extending 
a white shected bundle. 

*Hey,/>^x<7/i,’ Qemenza said. *Hold these for me until 1 ask 
for them. Hurry up.’ Automatically Vito reached over the 
empty space of the air shaft and took the bundle. Qemenza’s 
face was strained and urgent. He was in some soft of trouble 
and Vito’s helping action was instinctive. But when he imtied 
the bundle in his kitchen, there were five oily guns staining the 
white cloth. He put them in his bedroom closet and waited* 
He learned that Qemen 2 a had been taken away by the police. 
They must have been knocking on his door when he handed 
the guns over the air shaft.. 

Vito never said a word to anyone and of course his terrifled 
wife dared not open her lips even in gossip for fear her own 


199 



husband would be sene to prison. Two days later Peter Qe- 
menza reappeared in the neighbourhood and asked Vito 
casually, ‘Do you have my goods still?’ 

Vito nodded. He was in the habit of talking little. Clemenza 
came up to his tenement Hat and was given a glass of wine 
while Vito dug the bundle out of his bedroom closet. 

Clemenza drank his wine, his heavy good-natured face 
alertly watching Vito. ‘Did you look inside?’ 

Vito, his face impassive, shook his head. ‘I’m not interested 
in things that don’t concern me,’ he said. 

They drank wine together the rest of the evening. They 
found each other congenial. Qemenza was a storyteller; Vito 
Corleone was a listener to storytellers. They became casual 
friends. 

A few days later Qemenza asked the wife of Vito Corleone 
if she would like a fine rug for her living room floor. He took 
Vito with him to help carry the rug. 

Qemenza led Vito to an apartment house with two marble 
pillars and a white marble stoop. He used a key to open the 
door and they were inside a plush apartment. Qemenza 
grunted, ‘ Go on the other side of the room and help me roll it 
up.’ 

The rug was a rich red wool. Vito Corleone was astonished 
by Qemenza’s generosity. Together they roUed the rug into a 
pile and Qemenza took one end while Vito took the other. 
They lifted it and started carrying it towards the door. 

At that moment the apartment bell rang. Qemenza imme- 
diately dropped the rug and strode to the window. He pulled 
the drape aside slightly and what he saw made him draw a gun 
from inside his jacket. It was only at that moment the aston- 
ished 'Vito Corleone realized that they were stealing the rug 
firom some stranger’s apartment. 

The apartment bell rang again. Vito went up alongside 
Qemenza so that he too could see what was happening. At the 
door was a uniformed policeman. As they watched, the police- 
man gave the doorbell a final push, then shrugged and walked 
away down the marble steps and down the street. 

Qemenza grunted in a satisfied way and said, ‘Come on, let’s 
go.’ He picked up his end of the rug and Vito picked up the 


200 



other end. The policeman had barely turned the corner before 
they were edging out the hea'vy oaken door and into the street 
with the rug between them- Thirty minutes later they were 
cutting the rug to fit the living room of Vito Corleone^s apart- 
ment. They had enough left over for the bedroom. Qemenaa 
was an expert workman and from the poclcets of his wide, ill- 
fitting jacket (even then he liked to wear loose clothes though 
he was not so fat), he had the necessary carpet-cutting tools. 

Time went on, things did not improve. The Corleone funily 
could not eat the beautiful rug. Very well, there was no work, 
his wife and childreo must starve. Vito took some parcels of 
food from his friend Genco while he thought things out. 
Finally he was approached by Qemenza and Tessio, another 
young tough of the neighbourhood. They were men who 
thought well of him, the way he carried himself, and they 
knew he was desperate. They proposed to him that he become 
one of their gang which specialized in hijacking trucks of silk 
dresses after those trucks were loaded up at the fiictory on 3 ist 
Street. There was no risk. The truck drivers were sensible 
working-men who at the sight of a gun Hopped on the side- 
walk like angels while the hijackers drove the truck away to be 
unloaded at a friend’s warehouse. Some of the merchandise 
would be sold to an Italian wholesaler, part of the loot would 
be sold door-to-door in th^ Italian neighbourhoods - Arthur 
Avenue in the Bronx, Mulberry Street, and the Chelsea district 
in Manhattan - all to poor Italian families looking for a 
bargain, whose daughters could never be able to afford such 
fine apparel. Clemenza and Tessio needed Vito to drive since 
they knew he chauffeured the Abbandando grocery store de- 
livery truck. In 1919, skilled automobile drivers were at a 
premium. 

Agaiiist his better judgement, Vito Corleone accepted their 
oHer. The dinchmg argument was that he would clear at least a 
thousand dollars for his share of the job. But his young com- 
panions struck him as rash, the planning of the job haphazard, 
the distribution of the loot foolhardy. Their whole approach 
was too careless for his taste. But lie thought them of good, 
sound character. Peter Qemenza, already burly, inspired a 
certain trust, and the lean saturnine Tessio inspir^ confidence. 


aoi 



The job itself went off without a hitch. Vito Cotleone felt no 
fear» much to his astonishment, when his two comrades flashed 
guns and made the driver get out of the silk truck. He was also 
impressed with the coolness of Qemenza and Tessio. They 
didn’t get excited but joked with the driver, told him if he was 
a good lad they’d send his wife a few dresses. Because Vito 
thought it stupid to peddle dresses himself and so gave his 
whole share of stock to the fence, he made only seven hundred 
dollars. But this was a considerable sum of money in 1919. 

The next day on the street, Vito Corleone was stopped by 
the cream-suited, white-fedoraed Fanned. Fanned was a 
brutal-looking man and he had done nothing to disguise the 
circular scar that stretched in a white semicircle from ear to 
ear, looping under his chin. He had heavy black brows and 
coarse features which, when he smiled, were in some odd way 
amiable. 

He spoke with a very thick Sicilian accent. *Ah, young 
fellow,’ he said to Vito. ‘People tell me you’re rich. You and 
your two friends. But don’t you think you’ve treated me a little 
shabbily? After all, this is my neighbourhood and you should 
let me wet my beak.’ He used the Sicilian phrase of the Mafia, 
‘ Fart vagnari a Pi!(zu means the beak of any small bird 

such as a canary. The phrase itself was a demand for part of the 
loot. 

As was his habit, Vito Corleone did not answer. He under- 
stood the implication immediately and was waiting for a 
definite demand. 

Fanned smiled at him, showing gold teeth and stretching 
his noose-like scar tight around his face. He mopped his face 
with a handkerchief and unbuttoned his jacket for a moment as 
if to cool himself but really to show the gun he carried stuck 
in the waistband of his comfortably wide trousers. Then he 
sighed and said, ‘ &ive me five hundred dollars and I’ll forget 
the insult. After all, young people don’t know the courtesies 
due a man like myself.’ 

Vito Corleone smiled at him and even as a young man sdll 
unblooded, there was something so chilling in his smile that 
Fanued hesitated a moment before going on. ‘Otherwise the 
police will come to see you, your and children will be 


20s 



fthamed and destitute. Of course if my information as to your 
gains is incorrect I’ll dip my beak just a little. But no less than 
three hundred dollars. And don’t try to deceive me.’ 

For the £rst time Vito Corleone spoke. His voice was 
reasonable^ showed no anger. It was courteous, as befitted a 
young man speaking to an older man of Fanucci’s eminence. 
He said softly, *My two friends have my share of the money. 
I’ll have to speak to them.’ 

Fanucci was reassured. * You can tell your two friends that I 
expect them to let me wet my beak in the same manner. Don’t 
be afraid to tell them,’ he added reassuringly. Xlememsa and I 
know each other well, he understands these things. Let your- 
self be guided by him. He has more experience in these 
matters.’ 

Vito Corleone shrugged. He tried to look a litde embar- 
rassed. ^Of course,’ he said. ‘You understand this is all new to 
me. Thank you for speaking to me as a godfather.’ 

Fanucci was impressed. ‘You’re a good fellow,’ he said.. He 
took Vito’s hand and clasped it in both of his hairy ones. * You 
have respect,’ he said. ‘A fine thing in the young. Next time 
speak to me first, eh? Perhaps I can help you in your plans.’ 

In later years Vito Corleone understood tbat what had 
made him act in such a perfect, tactical way with Fanucci was 
the death of his own hot-tempered father who had been 
killed by the Mafia in Sicily. But at that time all he felt was an 
icy rage that this man planned to rob him of the money he had 
risked his life and freedom to earn. He had not been afraid. 
Indeed he thought, at that moment, that Fanucci was a cra2y 
fool. From what he had seen of Qemenxa, that burly Sicilian 
would sooner give up his life than a penny of hi^ loot. After 
all, Qemenza had been ready to kill a policeman merely to 
steal a rug. And the slender Tessio had the deadly air of a 
viper. 

But later that night, in Qemenza’s tenement apartment 
across the air shaft, Vito Corleone received another lesson in 
the education he had just begun. Clemenza cursed, Tessio 
scowled, but then both men started talking about whether 
Fanucci would be satisfied with two hundred dollars. Tessio 
thought he might. 


203 



Gemenza was positive. that scarface bastard must have 
found out what we made from the wholesaler who bought 
the dresses. Fanucci won’t take a dime less than three hundred 
dollars. We’ll have to pay.’ 

Vito was astonished but was careful not to show his aston- 
ishment. ‘Why do we have to pay him? What can he do to the 
three of us? We’re stronger than him. We have guns. Why do 
we have to hand over the money we earned?* 

Gemenza explained patiently. ‘Fanucci has friends, real 
brutes. He has connexions with the police. He’d like us' to tell 
him our plans because he could set us up for the cops and earn 
their gratitude. 'Ihcn they would owe him a favour. That’s 
how he operates. And he has a licence from Maranzalla him- 
self to work this neighbourhood.’ Maranzalla was a gangster 
often in the newspapers, reputed to be the leader of a criminal 
ring specializing in extortion, gambling, and armed robbery. 

Gemenza served wine that he had made himself. His wife, 
after putting a plate of salami, olives, and a loaf of Italian bread 
on the table, went down to sit with her women cronies in 
front of the building, carrying her chair with her. She was a 
young Italian girl only a few years in the country and did not 
yet understand English. 

Vito Corleone sat with his two friends and drank wine. He 
had never used his intelligence before as he was using it now. 
He was surprised at how clearly he could think. He recalled 
everything he knew about Fanucci. He remembered the day 
the man had had his throat cut and had run down the street 
holding his fedora under his chin to catch the dripping blood. 
He remembered the murder of the man who had wielded the 
knife and the other two having their sentences removed by 
paying ati indemnity. And suddenly he was sure that Fanucci 
had no great connexions, could not possibly have. Not a man 
who informed to the police. Not a man who allowed his ven- 
geance to be bought off. A real mafioso chief would have had 
the other two men killed also. No, Fanucci had got lucky and 
killed one man but had known he could not kill the other two 
after they were alerted. And so he had allowed himself to be 
paid. It was the personal brutal force of the man that allowed 
him to levy tribute on the shopkeepers, the gambling games 


204 



that ran in the tenement apartments. But Vito Corleone knew 
of at least one gambling game that had never paid Fanucci 
tributes and nothing had ever happened to the man running it. 

And so it was Fanucci alone. Or Fanucci with some gunmen 
hired for special jobs on a strictly cash basis. Which left Vito 
Corleone with another decision. The course his own life must 
take* 

It was from this experience came his oft-repeated belief that 
every tnan has but one destiny. On that night he could have 
paid Fanucci the tribute and have become again a grocery clerk 
with perhaps his own grocery store in the years to come. But 
destiny had decided that he was to become a Don and had 
brought Fanucci to him to^et him on bis destined path. 

Wlien they finished the bottle of wine, Vito said cautiously 
to Clemeoza and Tessio, *If you like, why not give me two 
hundred dollars each to pay to Fanucci? I guarantee he will 
accept that amount from me. Then leave everything in my 
hands. I’ll settle this problem zo your satisfaction.* 

At once Qemenza’s eyes gleamed with suspicion. Vito said 
to him coldly, ‘I never lie to people I have accepted as my 
ftiends. Speak to Fanucci yourself tomorrow. Let him ask you 
for the money. But don’t pay him. And don’t in any way 
quarrel with him. Tell him you have to get the money and will 
give it to me to give him. Let him understand that you are 
willing to pay what he asks. Don’t bargain. I’ll quarrel over 
the price with him. There’s no point making him angry with 
us if he’s as dangerous a man as you say he is.’ 

They left it at that. The next day Qemenza spoke with 
Fanucci to make sure that Vito was not making up the story. 
Then Qemenxa came to Vito’s apartment and gave him the 
two hundred dollars. He peered at Vito Codeohe and said, 
*Fanuccd told me nothing below three hundred dollars, how 
will you make him take less?’ 

Vito Corleone said reasonably, * Surely that’s no concern of 
yours. Just remember that I’ve done you a service.’ 

Tessio came later. Tessio was more reserved than Qcmenaa, 
sharper, more clever but with less force. He sensed something 
amiss, something not quite right. He was a little worried. He 
said to Vito Corleone, * Watch yourself with that bastard of a 


205 



Black Hand, he’s tdcky as a pnest. Do you 'want me to be here 
when you hand him the money, as a witness?’ 

Vito Corleone shook his head. He didn’t even bother to 
answer. He merely said to Tcssio, ‘Tell Fanucci I’ll pay him 
the money here in my house at nine o’clock tonight. I’ll have 
to give him a glass of wine and talk, reason with him to take 
the lesser sum.’ 

Tessio shook his head. * You won’t have much luck. Fanucci 
never retreats.* 

*1*11 reason with him,* Vito Corleone said. It was to become 
a famous phrase in the years to come. It was to become the 
warning rattle before a deadly strike.iWhen he became a Don 
and asked opponents to sit down and reason with him, they 
understood it was the last chance to resolve an afiair without 
bloodshed and murder. 

Vito Corleone told his wife to take the two children. Sonny 
and Fredo, down into the street after supper and on no 
account to let them come up to the house until he gave her 
permission. She was to sit on guard at the tenement door. He 
had some private business with Fanucci that could not be in- 
terrupted. He saw the look of fear on her face and was angry. 
He said to her quiedy, *Do you think you’ve married a fool?’ 
She didn’t answer. She did not answer because she was 
frightened, not of Fanucci now, but of her husband. He was 
changing visibly before her eyes, hour by hour, into a man 
who radiated some dangerous force. He had always been quiet, 
speaking litde, but always gende, always reasonable, which 
was extraordinary in a young Sicilian male. What she was 
seeing was the shedding of his protective coloradon of a harm- 
less nobody now that he was ready to start on his destiny. He 
had sftarted late, he was twenty-five years old, but he was to 
start with a flourish. 

Vito Corleone had decided to murder Fanucci. By doing so 
he would have an extra seven hundred dollars in his bankroll. 
The three hundred dollars he himself would have to pay the 
Black Hand terrorist and the two hundred dollars from Tessio 
and the two himdred dollars from Qemenza. If he did not kill 
Fanucci, he would have to pay the man seven hundred dollars 
cold cash. Fanucci alive was not worth seven hundred doUars 


206 



to him. He would not pay seven hundred dollars to keep 
Fanned alive. If Fanned needed seven himdred dollars for an 
operation to save his life, he would not give Fanned seven 
hundred dollars for the surgeon. He owed Fanued no personal 
debt of gratitude, they were not blood relatives, he did not 
love Fanued. Whyfore, then, should he give Fanned seven 
hundred dollars? 

And it followed inevitably, that since Fanucci wished to take 
seven hundred dollars from him by force, why should he not 
kill Fanned? Surely the world could do without such a person. 

There were of course some practical reasons. Fanued might 
indeed have powerful friends who would seek vengeance. 
Fanucci himself was a dangerous man, not so easily killed. 
There were the police and the electric chair. But Vito Corleone 
had lived under a sentence of death since the murder of his 
father. As a boy of twelve he had fled his executioners and 
crossed the ocean into a strange land, taking a strange name. 
And years of quiet observation had convinced him that he had 
more intelligence and more courage than other men, though 
he had never had the opportunity to use that intelligence and 
courage. 

And yet he hesitated before taking that first step towards his 
destiny. He even packed the seven hundred dollars in a single 
fold of bills and put the money in a convenient side pocket of 
his trousers. But he put the money in the left side of his 
trousers. In the right-hand pocket he put the gun Qememsa 
had given him to use in the hijacking of the silk truck. 

Fanucci came promptly at nine in the evening. Vito Corleone 
set out a jug of homemade wine that Clemenaa had given him. 

Fanucci put his white fedora on the table beside the jug of 
wine. He i^oosened his broad multiflowered tie, its tomato 
stains camouflaged by the bright patterns. The summer night 
was hot, the gaslight feeble. It was very quiet in the apartment. 
But Vito Corleone was icy. To show his good faith he handed 
over the roll of bills and watched carefully as Fanucci, after 
coimting it, took out a wide leather wallet and stuffed the 
money inside. Fanucci sipped his glass of wine and said, * You 
still owe me two hundred doUai^.’ His heavy-browed face was 
CKpressiooiess. 


aoy 



Vito Corleone said in his cool reasonable voice, *I*m a litdc 
short. I’ve been out of work. Let me owe you the money for a 
few weeks.* 

This was a permissible gambit. Fanucd had the bulk of the 
money and would wait.. He might even be persuaded to take 
nothing more or to wait a little longer. He chuckled over iiis 
wine and said, ‘Ah, you’re a sharp young fellow. How is it I’ve 
never noticed you before? You’re too quiet a chap for your 
own interest. I could find some work for you to do that would 
be very profitable.* 

Vito Corleone showed his interest with a polite nod and 
filled up the man’s glass from the purple jug. But Fanucci 
thought better of what he was going to say and rose from liis 
chair and shook Vito’s hand. ‘Goodnight, young fellow,’ he 
said. ‘No hard feelings, eh? If 1 can ever do you a service let 
me know. You've done a good job for yourself tonight.’ 

Vito let Fanucci go down the stairs and out the building. 
The street was thronged with witnesses to show that he had 
left the Corleone home safely. Vito watched from the window. 
He saw Fanucci turn the comer towards Eleventh Avenue and 
knew he was headed towards his apartment, probably to put away 
his loot before coming out on the streets again. Perhaps to put 
away his gun. Vito Corleone left his apartment and ran up the 
stairs to the roof. He travelled over the square block of roofs 
and descended down the steps of an empty loft building fire 
escape that left him in the back yard. He kicked the back door 
open and went through the front door. Across the street was 
Fanucci’s tenement apartment house. 

The viUage of tenements extended only as fiu: west as Tenth 
Avenue. Eleventh Avenue was mostly warehouses ^d lofts 
rented by firms who shipped by New York Central Railroad 
and wanted access to the ficight yards that honeycombed the 
area from Eleventh Avenue to the Hudson River. Fanucci’s 
apartment house was one of the few left standing in this 
wilderness and was occupied mostly by bachelor trainmen, 
yard workers, and the cheapest prostitutes. These people did 
not sit in the street and gossip like honest Indians, they sat in 
beer taverns guzzling their pay. So Vito Corleone found it an 
easy matter to slip across the deserted Eleventh Avenue and 

2o8 



into the vestibule of Fanucd’s apartment house. There he 
drew the gun he had never fired and waited for Fanned. 

He watched through the glass door of the vestibule, know- 
ing Fanucci would come down from Tenth Avenue. Qemenaa 
had showed him the safety on the gun and he had triggered it 
empty- But as a young boy in Sicily at the early age of nine, he 
had often gone hunting with his father, had often fired the 
heavy shotgun called the lupara. It was his skill with the lupara 
even as a small boy that had brought the s<:ntence of death 
upon him by his father’s murderers. 

Now waiting in the darkened hallway, he saw the white blob 
of Fanucci crossing the street towards the doorway. Vito 
stepped back, shoulders pressed against the inner door that led 
to the stairs. He held his gun out to fire. His extended hand 
was only two paces from the outside door. The door swung 
in. Fanucci, white, broad, smelly, jfilled the square of light. 
Vito Corleonc fired. 

The opened door let some of the sound escape into the 
street, the rest of the gun’s explosion shook the building. 
Fanucci was holding on to the sides of the door, trying to stand 
erect, trying to reach for his gun. The force of his struggle had 
torn the buttons off his jacket and made it swing loose. His gun 
was exposed but so was a spidery vein of red on the white 
shirtfront of his stomach. Very carefully, as if he were plung- 
ing a needle into a vein, Vito Corleone fired his second bullet 
into that red web. 

Fanucci fell to his knees, propping the door op^n. He let out 
a terrible groan, the groan of a man in great physical distress 
that was almost comical. He kept giving these groans; Vito 
remembered hearing at least three of them before 4ie put the 
gun against Fanucci’s sweaty, suety cheek and fired into his 
brain. No mote than five seconds had passed when Fanucci 
slumped into death, jamming the door open with his body. 

Very carefully Vito took the wide wallet out of the dead 
man’s jacket pocket and put it inside his shirt. Then he walked 
across the street into the loft building, through that into the 
yard and climbed the fire escape to the roof. From there he 
surveyed the street. Fanucci’s body was still lying in the door- 
way but there was no sign of any other person. Two windows 


209 



had gone up in the tenement and he could see dark heads 
poked out but since he could not see their features they had 
certainly not seen his. And such men would not give informa- 
tion to the police. Fanucci might lie there until dawn or until a 
patrolman making the rounds stumbled on his body. No per- 
son in that house would deliberately expose himseh to police 
suspicion or questioning. They would lock their doors and 
pretend they had heard nothing. 

He could take his time. He travelled over the rooftops to his 
own roof door and down to his own flat. He unlocked the 
door, went inside and then locked the door behind him. He 
rifled the dead man's wallet. Besides the seven hundred dollars 
he had given Fanucci there were only some singles and a five- 
doUar note. 

Tucked inside the flap was an old five-dollar gold piece, 
probably a luck token. If Fanucci was a rich gangster, he 
certainly did not carry his wealth with him. This confirmed 
some of Vito’s suspicions. 

He knew he had to get rid of the wallet and the gun (know- 
ing enough even then that he must leave the gold piece in the 
wallet). He went up on the roof again and travelled over a few 
ledges. He threw the wallet down one air shaft and then he 
emptied the gun of bullets and smashed its barrel against the 
roof ledge. The barrel wouldn’t break. He reversed it in his 
hand and smashed the butt against the side of a chimney. The 
butt split into two halves. He smashed it again and the pistol 
broke into barrel and handle, two separate pieces. He used 
a separate air shaft for each. They made no sound when 
they struck the earth five storeys below, but sank into the soft 
hill of garbage that had accumulated there. In the morn- 
ing more garbage would be thrown out of the windows and, 
with luck, would cover everything. Vito returned to his apart- 
ment. 

He was trembling a little but wa» absolutely under control. 
He changed his clothes and fearful that some blood might have 
splattered on them, he threw them into a metal tub his wife 
used for washing. He took lye and heavy brown laundry soap 
to soak the clothes and scrubbed them with the metal wash 
board beneath the sink. Then he scoured tub and sink with lye 


210 



and soap. He found a bundle of newly-washed clothes in the 
comer of the bedroom and mingled his own clothes with these. 
Then he put on a fresh shirt and trousers and went down to 
join his wife and children and neighbours in front of the 
tenement. 

All these precautions proved to be unnecessary. The police, 
after discovering the dead body at dawn, never questioned 
Vito Corleone. Indeed he was astonished that they never 
learned about Fairucd’s visit to his home on the night he was 
shot to death. He had counted on that for an alibi, Fanucci 
leaving the tenement alive. He only learned later that the 
police had been delighted with the murder of Fanucci and not 
too anxious to pursue his killers. They had assumed it was 
another gang execution, and had questioned hoodlums with 
records in the rackets and a history of strong-arm. Since Vito 
had never been in trouble he never came into the picture. 

But if he had outwitted the police, his partners were another 
matter. Pete Clemenra and Tessio avoided him for the next 
week, for the next two weeks, then they came to call on him 
one evening. They came with obvious respect. Vito Corleone 
greeted them with impassive courtesy and served them wine. 

Qemenza spoke first. He said softly, ‘Nobody is collecting 
from the store owners on Ninth Avenue, Nobody is collecting 
from the card games and gambling in the neighbourhood.* 

Vito Corleone gaxed at both men steadily but did not reply. 
Tessio spoke. ‘We could take over Fanucci’s customers. TTaey 
would pay us.' 

Vito Corleone shrugged. ‘Why come to me? I have no 
interest in such things.’ 

Qemenxa laughed. Even in his youth, before growing his 
enormous belly, he had a fat man's laugh. He said now to Vito 
Corleone, ‘How about that gun I gave you for the truck job? 
Since you won’t need it any more you can give it back to me.' 

Very slowly and deliberately Vito Corleone took a wad of 
bills out of his side pocket and peeled off five tens. ‘Here, I'll 
pay you. I threw the gun away after the truck job.' He smiled 
at the two men. 

At that time Vito Corleone did not know the effect of this 
smile. It was chilling because it attempted no menace. He 


2II 



smiled as if it was some private joke only he himself could 
appreciate. But since he smiled in that fashion only in affairs 
that were lethal, and since the joke was not really private, and 
since his eyes did not smile, ami since his outward character 
was usually so reasonable and quiet, the sudden unmasking of 
his true self was frightening. 

Clemenza shook his head. don’t want the money,’ he said. 
Vito pocketed the bills. He waited. They all understood each 
other. They knew he had killed Fanucci and though they 
never spoke about it to anyone the whole neighbourhood, 
within a few weeks, also knew. Vito Corleone was treated as a 
*man of respect’ by everyone. But he made no attempt to take 
over the Fanucci rackets and tributes. 

What followed then was inevitable. One night Vito’s wife 
brought a neighbour, a widow, to the flat. The woman was 
Italian and of unimpeacheable character. She worked hard to 
keep a home for her fatherless children. Her sixtecn-y ear-old 
son brought home his pay envelope sealed, to hand over to her 
in the old-country style; her scventeen-year-old daughter, a 
dressmaker, did the same. The whole family sewed buttons on 
cards at night at slave labour piece rates. The woman’s name 
was Signora Colombo. 

Vito Corleonc’s wife said, ‘The Signora has a favour to ask 
of you. She is having some trouble.’ 

Vito Corleone expected to be asked for money, which he 
was ready to give. But it seemed that Mrs Colombo owned a 
dog which her youngest son adored. The landlord had 
received complaints on the dog barking at night and had told 
Mrs Colombo to get rid of it. She had pretended to do so. The 
landlord had found out that she had deceived him and had 
ordered her to vacate her apartment. She had promised this 
time to truly get rid of the dog and she had done so. But the 
landlord was so angry that he would not revoke his order. She 
had to get out or the police would be summoned to put her 
out. And her poor little boy bad cried so when they had given 
the dog away to relatives who lived in Long Island. All for 
nothing, they would lose their home. 

Vito Q>rleone asked her gendy, 'Why do you ask me to help 
you?’ 


211 



Mrs Colombo nodded towards his wife. * She told me to ask 
you/ 

He was siurprised. His wife had never questioned him about 
the clothes he had washed the night he had murdered Fanucci. 
Had never asked him where all the money came from when he 
was not working. Even now her face was impassive. Vito said 
to Mrs Colombo, ‘I can give you some money to help you 
move, is that what you want?* 

The woman shook her head, she was in tears. ‘All my friends 
are here, all the girls I grew up with in Italy. How can I move 
to another neighbourhood with strangers? 1 want you to 
speak to the landlord to let me stay.* 

Vito nodded. ‘It’s done then. You won’t have to move. I’ll 
speak to him tomorrow morning.* 

His wife gave him a smile which he did not acknowledge, 
but he felt pleased. Mrs Colombo looked a little uncertain. 
‘You’re sure he’ll say yes, the iat dlord?* she asked. 

* Signor Roberto?’ Vito said in a surprised voice. ‘Of course 
he will. He’s a good-hearted fellow. Once I explain how things 
are with you he’ll take pity on your misfortunes. Now don’t let 
it trouble you any more. Don’t get so upset. Guard your 
health, for the sake of your children.’ 

The landlord, Mr Roberto, came to the neighbourhood 
every day to check on the row of five tenements that he owned. 
He was a padrone^ a man who sold Italian labourers just off the 
boat to the big corporations. With his profits he had bought 
the tenements one by one. An educated man from the North of 
Italy, he felt only contempt for these illiterate Southerners 
from Sicily and Naples who swarmed like vermin through his 
buildings, who threw garbage down the air shafts, who let 
cockroaches and rats eat away his walls without lifting a hand 
to preserve his property. He was not a bad man, he was a good 
husband and father, but constant worry about his investments, 
about the money he earned, about the inevitable expenses that 
came with being a man of property had worn his nerves to a 
frazzle so that he was in a constant state of irritation. When 
Vito Corleone stopped him on the street to ask for a word, Mr 
Roberto was brusque. Not rude, since any one of these 


213 



Southerners might stick a knife into you if rubbed the wrong 
way, though this young man looked like a quiet fellow. 

‘ Signor Roberto,' said Vito Corleone, ‘the friend of my wife, 
a poor widow with no man to protect her, tells me that for 
some reason she has been ordered to move from her apart- 
ment in your building. She is in despair. She has no money, she 
has no friends except those that live here. I told her that I 
would speak to you, that you are a reasonable man who acted 
out of some misunderstanding. She has got rid of the animal 
that caused all the trouble and so why shouldn’t she stay? As 
one Italian to another, I ask you the favour.’ 

Signor Roberto studied the young man in front of him. He 
saw a man of medium stature but strongly built, a peasant but 
not a bandit, though he so laughably dared to call himself an 
Italian. Roberto shrugged. ‘1 have already rented the apart- 
ment to another family for higher rent,’ he said. ‘I cannot dis- 
appoint them for the sake of your friend.’ 

Vito Corleone nodded in agreeable understanding. ‘How 
much more a month?’ he asked. 

‘Five dollars,’ Mr Roberto said. This was a lie. The railway 
flat, four dark rooms, rented for twelve dollars a month to the 
widow and he had not been able to get more than that from the 
new tenant. 

Vito Cqrleone took a roll of bills out of his pocket and 
peeled ofi* three tens. ‘Here is the six months’ increase in ad- 
vance. You needn’t speak to her about it, she’s a proud 
woman. See me again in another six months. But of course 
you’ll let her keep her dog.’ 

‘Like hell,’ Mr Roberto said. ‘And who the hell are you to 
give me orders. Watch your manners or you’ll be out on your 
Sicilian ass in the street there.’ 

Vito Corleone raised his hands in surprise. *l’m asking you 
a favour, only that. One never knows when one might ne^ a 
friend, isn’t that true? Here, take this money as a sign of my 
goodwill and make your own decision. I wouldn’t dare to 
quarrel with it.’ He thrust the money into Mr Roberto’s hand. 
‘ Do me this little favour, just take the money and think things 
over. Tomorrow morning if you want to give me the money 
back by all means do so. If you want the woman out of your 


214 



house, how can I stop you? It*s your property, after fill. If you 
don’t want the dog in there, 1 can understand. I dislike 
animals myself.’ He patted Mr Roberto on the shoulder. ‘Do 
me this service, eh? I won’t forget it. Ask your friends in the 
neighbourhood about me, they’ll tell you Fm a man who 
believes in showing his gratitude.’ 

But of course Mr Roberto had already begun to understand. 
That evening he made inquiries about Vito Corleone. He did 
not wait until the next morning. He knocked on the Corleone 
door that very night, apologmng for the lateness of the hour 
and accepted a glass of wine from Signora Corleone. He 
assured Vito Corleone that it had all been a dreadful misunder- 
standing, that of course Signora Colombo could remain in the 
flat, of course she could keep her dog. Who were those 
miserable tenants to complain about noise from a poor 
animal when they paid such a low rent? At the finish he t^ew 
the thirty dollars Vito Corleone had given him on the table 
and said in the most sincere fashion, ‘Your good heart in 
helping this poor widow has shamed me and I wish to show 
that I, too, have some Christian charity* Her rent will remain 
what it was.’ 

AH concerned played this comedy prettily. Vito poured 
wine, called for cakes, wrung Mr Roberto’s hand and praised 
his warm heart. Mr Roberto sighed and said that having made 
the acquaintance of such a man as Vito Corleone restored his 
fidth in human nature. Finally they tore themselves away from 
each other. Mr Roberto, his bones turned to jelly with fear at 
his narrow escape, caught the streetcar to his home in the 
Bronx and took to his bed. He did not reappear in his tene- 
ments for three days. 

* 

Vito Corleone was now a ‘man of respect ’ in the neighbour- 
hood. He was reputed to be a member of the Mafia of Sicily. 
One day a man who ran card games in a furnished room came 
to bitn s^id voluntarily paid him twenty dollars each week for 
his ‘friendship’. He h^ only to visit the game once or twice a 
week to let the players understand they were under his protec- 
tion. 

Store owners who had problems with young hoodlums 



asked him to intercede. He did so and was properlyre warded. 
Soon be had the enormous income for that time and place of 
one hundred dollars a week. Since Qemenaa and Tessio were 
his friends, his allies, he had to give them each part of the 
money, but this he did without being asked. Finally he decided 
to go into the olive oil importing business with his boyhood 
chum, Genco Abbandando. Genco would handle the business^ 
the importing of the olive oil from Italy, the buying at the 
proper price, the storing in his father’s warehouse. Genco had 
the experience for this part of the business. Qemenza and 
Tessio would be the salesmen. They would go to every Italian 
grocery store in Manhattan, then Brooklyn, then the Bronx, to 
persuade store owners to stock Genco Pura olive oil. (With 
typical modesty, Vito Corleone refused to name the brand 
after himself.) Vito of coxirse would be the head of the firm 
since he was supplying most of the capital. He also would be 
called in on special cases, where store owners resisted the sales 
talks of Clemenxa and Tessio. Then Vito Corleone would use 
his own formidable powers of persuasion. 

For the next few years Vito Corleone lived that completely 
satisfying life of a smill businessman wholly devoted to build- 
ing up his commercial enterprise in a d 3 rnamic, expanding 
economy. He was a devoted &ther and husband but so busy 
be could spare his family little of his time. As Genco Pnra olive 
oil grew to become the best-selling imported Italian oil in 
America, his organization mushroomed. Like any good 
businessman he came to understand the benefits of under- 
cutting his rivals in price, barring them from distribution out- 
lets by persuading store owners to stock less of their brands. 
Like any good businessman he aimed at holding a monopoly 
by forcing his rivals to abandon the field or by merging with 
his own company. However, since he had started off relatively 
helpless, economically, since he did not believe in advertising, 
relying on word of mouth, and since if truth be told, his olive 
oil was no better than his competitors’, he could not use the 
common strangleholds of legitimate businessmen. He had to 
rely on the force of his own personality and his reputation as a 
‘man of respect’. 

Even as a young mao, Vito Corleone became known as a 
ai6 



‘man of reasonableness’* He never uttered a threat. He always 
used logic that proved to be irresistible. He always made 
certain that the other fellow got his share of profit. Nobody 
lost. He did this, of course, by obvious means. Like many 
businessmen of genius he learned that free competition was 
wasteful, monopoly efficient. And so he simply set about 
achieving that efficient monopoly. There were some oil 
wholesalers in Brooklyn, men of fiery temper, headstrong, not 
amenable to reason, who refused to see, to recogai2e, the 
vision of Vito Qirleone, even after he had explained every- 
thing to them with the utmost patience and det^. With these 
men Vito Corlcone threw up his hands in despair and sent 
Tessio to Brooklyn to set up a headquarters and solve the 
problem. Warehouses were burned, truckloads of olive-green 
oil were dumped to form lakes in the cobbled waterfront 
streets. One rash man, an arrogant Milanese with more fiuth 
in the police than a saint has in Christ, actually went to the 
authorities with a complaint against his fellow Italians, break- 
ing the ten-century-old law of omtrta. But before the matter 
could progress any further the wholesaler disappeared, never 
to be seen again, leaving behind, deserted, bis devot^ wife 
and three children, who, God be thanked, were fully grown 
and capable of taking over his business and coming to terms 
with the Gmeo Pura Oil Company. 

But great men are not bom great, they grow great, and so k 
was with Vito Corleone. When Prohibition came to pass and 
alcohol forbidden to be sold, Vito Corleone made the final 
step from a quite ordinary, somewhat mthless businessman to 
a great Don in the world of criminal enterprise. It did not 
happen in a day, it did not happen in a year, but byjche end of 
the Prohibition period and the start of the Great Depression, 
Vito Corlcone had become the Godfather, the Don, Don 
Corleone. 

It started casuaUy enough. By this time the Gefuo Ptira Oil 
Company had a fleet of six delivery trucks. Through Qemenza, 
Vito Corleone was approached by a group of Italian boot- 
leggers who smuggl^ alcohol and whisky in from QinaHa 
They needed trucks and deliverymen to distribute 
produce over New York City. They needed deliverymen who 

«7 



were reliable, discreet, and of a certain determination and force. 
They were willing to pay Vito Corleone for his trucks and for 
his men. The fee was so enormous that Vito Corleone cut back 
drastically on his oil business to use the trucks almost ex- 
clusively for the service of the bootlegger-smugglers. This 
despite the fact that these gentlemen had accompanied their 
offer with a silky threat. But even then Vito Corleone was so 
mature a man that he did not take insult at a threat or become 
angry and refuse a profitable offer because of it. He evaluated 
the ^reat, found it lacking in conviction, and lowered his 
opinion of his new partners because they had been so stupid to 
use threats where none were needed. This was useful informa- 
tion to be pondered at its proper time. 

Again he prospered. But, more important, he acquired 
knowledge and contacts and experience. And he piled up good 
deeds as a banker piles up securities. For in the following years 
it became clear that Vito Corleone was not only a man of 
talent but, in his way, a genius. 

He made himself the protector of the Italian families who 
set themselves up as smdl speakeasies in their homes, selling 
whisky at fifteen cents a glass to bachelor labourers. He 
became godfather to Mrs Colombo’s youngest son when the 
lad made his confirmation and gave a handsome present of a 
twenty-dollar gold piece. Meanwhile, since it was inevitable 
that some of his trucks be stopped by the police, Genco 
Abbandando hired a fine lawyer with many contacts in the 
Police Department and the judiciary. A system of payoffs was 
set up and soon the Corleone organization had a sizeable 
‘sheet’, the list of officials entitled to a monthly sum. When 
the lawyer tried to keep this list down, apologizing for the 
expense, Vito Corleone reassured him. ‘No, no,’ he said. ‘Get 
everyone on it even if they can’t help us right now. 1 believe in 
friendship and I am willing to show my friendship first.’ 

As time went by the Corleone empire became larger, more 
trucks were added, the ‘sheet’ grew longer. Also the men 
working directly for Tessio and Clemenza grew in number. 
The whole thing was becoming unwieldy. Finally Vito 
Corleone worked out a system of organization. Pfie gave 
Clemenza and Tessio each the title of Caporeffme^ or captain, 

zi8 



and the men who worked beneath them the rank of soldier. He 
named Genco Abbandando his counsellor, or Consiglicri. He 
put layers of insulation between himself and any operational 
act. When he gave an order it was to Genco or to one of the 
caporeffmes alone. Rarely did he have a witness to any order he 
gave any particular one of them. Then he split Tessio’s group 
and made it responsible for Brooklyn. He also split Tessio ofiF 
from Qemenza and made it clear over the years that he did not 
want the two men to associate even socially except when 
absolutely necessary. He explained this to the more intelligent 
Tessio, who caught his d^ immediately, though Vito ex- 
plained it as a security measure against the law. Tessio under- 
stood that Vito did not want his two caporegimes to have any 
opportunity to conspire against him and he also understood 
there was no ill will involved, merely a tactical precaution. In 
return Vito gave Tessio a free hand in Brooklyn while he kept 
CIcmenza’s Bronx fief very much under his thumb. Clemenza 
was the braver, more reckless, the crueller man despite his out- 
ward jollity, and needed a tighter rein. 

The Great Depression increased the power of Vito Corleone. 
And indeed it was about that time he came to be called Don 
Corleone. Everywhere in the city, honest men begged for 
honest work in vain. Proud men demeaned themselves and 
their families to accept official charity from a contemptuous 
officialdom. But the men of Don Corleone walked the streets 
with their heads held high, their pockets stuffed with silver 
and paper money. With no fear of losing their jobs. And even 
Don Corleone, Aat most modest of men, could not help feel- 
ing a sense of pride. He was taking care of his world, his 
people. He had not failed those who depended oil him and 
gave him the sweat of their brows, risked their freedom and 
their lives in his service. And when an employee of his was 
arrested and sent to prison by some mischance, that unfor- 
tunate man’s family received a living allowance; and not a 
miserly, beggarly, begrudging pittance but the same amount 
the man earned when free. 

This of course was not pure Christian charity. Not his best 
friends would have called Don Corleone a saint from heaven. 
There was some self-interest in this generosity. An employee 


219 



sent to prison knew he had oniy to keep his mouth shut and 
his wife and children would be cared for. He knew that if he 
did not inform to the police a warm welcome would be his 
when he left prison. There would be a party waiting in his 
home, the best of food, homemade ravioli, wine, pastries, 
with all bis friends and relatives gathered to rejoice in his 
freedom. And sometime during the night the Consiglioriy 
Genco Abbandando, or perhaps even the Don himself, would 
drop by to pay his respects to such a stalwart, take a glass of 
wine in his honour, and leave a handsome present of money 
so that he could enjoy a week or two of leisure with his family 
before returning to his daily toil. Such was the infinite sym- 
pathy and understanding of Don Corleone. 

It was at this time that the Don got the idea that he ran his world 
far better than his enemies ran the greater world which con- 
tinually obstructed his path. And this feeling was nurtured by 
the poor people of the neighbourhood who constantly came to 
him for help. To get on the home relief, to get a young boy a 
job or out of jail, to borrow a small sum of money desperately 
needed, to intervene with landlords who against all reason 
demanded rent from jobless tenants. 

Don Vito Corleone helped them all. Not only that, he 
helped them with goodwill, with encouraging words to take 
the bitter sting out of the charity he gave them. It was only 
natural then that when these Italians were puzzled and con- 
fused on who to vote for to represent them in the state legis- 
lature, in the city offices, in the Congress, they should ask the 
advice of their friend Don Corleone, their Godfather. And so 
he became a political power to be consulted by practical party 
chiefs. He consolidated this power with a far-seeing states- 
manlike intelligence; by helping brilliant boys from poor 
Italian families through college, boys who would later 
become lawyers, assistant district attorneys, and even judges. 
He planned for the future of his empire with all the foresight 
of a great national leader. 

The repeal of Prohibition dealt this empire a crippling blow 
but again he had taken his precautions. In 1953 he sent emis- 
saries to the man who controlled all the gambling activities of 
Manhattan, the crap games on the docks, the shylocking that 


220 



went with it as hot dogs go with baseball games, the book- 
making on sports and horses, the illicit gambling houses that 
ran poker games, the policy or numbers racket of Harlem. 
This man’s name was Salvatore Maran2ano and he was one of 
the acknowledged pe^^novanti^ .90 calibres, or big shots of 
the New York underworld. The Corleone emissaries proposed 
to Maranzano an equal partnership beneficial to both partly. 
Vito Corleone with his organization, his police and political 
contacts, could give the Maranzano operations a stout um- 
brella and the new strength to expand into Brooklyn and the 
Bronx. But Maranzano was a short-sighted man and spurned 
the Corleone offer with contempt. The great A 1 Capone was 
Maranzano’s friend and he had his own organization, his own 
men, plus a huge war chest. He would not brook this upstart 
whose reputation was more that of a Parliamentary debator 
than a true mafioso. Maranzano’s refusal touched off the 
great war of 1933 which was to change the whole structure of 
the underworld in New York City. 

At first glance it seemed an uneven match. Salvatore 
Maranzano had a powerful organization with strong en- 
forcers. He had a friendship with Capone in Chicago and could 
call on help in that quarter. He also had a good relationship 
with the Tattaglia Family, which controlled prostitution in the 
city and what there was of the thin drug traffic at that time. He 
also had political contacts with powerful business leaders who 
used his enforcers to terrorize the Jewish unionists in the 
garment centre and the Italian anarchist syndicates in the 
building trades. 

Against this Don Corleone could throw two small but 
superbly organized regimes led by Qemenza and Tessio. His 
political and police contacts were negated by the business 
leaders who would support Maranzano. But in his favour was 
the enemy’s lack of intelligence about his organization. The 
underworld did not know the true strength of his soldiers and 
even were deceived that Tessio in Brooklyn was a separate and 
mdependefit operation. 

And yet despite all this, it was an unequal battle until Vito 
Codeone evened out the odds with one master stroke. 

Maranzano sent a call to Capone for his two best gunmen to 


221 



come to New York to eliminate the upstart. The Corleotie 
Family had friends and intelligence in Chicago who relayed the 
news that the two gunmen were arriving by train, Vito Cor- 
leone dispatched Luca Brasi to take care of them with instruc- 
tions that would liberate the strange man’s most savage 
instincts. 

Brasi and his people, four of them, received the Chicago 
hoods at the railroad station. One of Brasi’s men procured and 
drove a taxicab for the purpose and the station porter carrying 
the bags led the Capone men to this cab. When tliey got in, 
Brasi and another of his men crowded in after them, guns 
ready, and made the two Chicago boys lie on the floor. The 
cab drove to a warehouse near the docks that B^si had 
prepared for them. 

The two Capone men were bound hand and foot and small 
bath towels were stuflFed into their mouths to keep them from 
crying out. 

Then Brasi took an axe from its place against the wall and 
started hacking at one of the Capone men. He chopped the 
man’s feet off, then the legs at the knees, then the thighs where 
they joined the torso. Brasi was an extremely powerful man 
but it took him many swings to accomplish his purpose. By 
that time of course the victim had given up the ghost and the 
floor of the warehouse was slippery with the hacked fragments 
of his flesh and the gouting of his blood. WTien Brasi turned to 
his second victim he found further effort unnecessary. The 
second Capone gunman out of sheer terror had, impossibly, 
swallowed the bath towel in his mouth and suffocated. The 
bath towel was found in the man’s stomach when the police 
performed their autopsy to determine the cause of death. 

X few days later in Qiicago the Capones received a message 
from Vito Corleone. It was to this effect ; ‘ You know now how 
I deal with enemies. Why does a Neapolitan interfere in a 
quarrel between two Sicilians? If you wish me to consider you 
as a friend I owe you a service which I will pay on demand. A 
man like yourself must know how much more profitable it is 
to have a friend who, instead of calling on you £ot help, takes 
care of his own affairs and stands ever ready to help you in 
some future time of trouble. If you do not wish my fidendship, 


22Z 



so be k. But then 1 must tell you that the climate in this city is 
damp; unhealthy for Neapolitans, and you are advised never 
to visit it/ 

The arrogance of this letter was a calculated one. The Don 
held the Capones in small esteem as stupid, obvious cut- 
throats. His intelligence informed him that Capone had for- 
feited all political influence because of his public arrogance and 
the flaunting of his criminal wealth. The Don knew, in fact 
was positive, that without political influence, without the 
camouflage of society, Capone’s world, and others like it, 
could be easily destroyed. He knew Capone was on the path to 
destruction. He also knew that Capone’s influence did not 
extend beyond the boundaries of Qiicago, terrible and all- 
pervading as that influence there might be. 

The tactic was successful. Not so much because of its 
ferocity but because of the chilling swifhiess, the quickness of 
the Don’s reaction. If his intelligence was so good, any further 
moves would be fraught with danger. It was better, ^ wiser, 
to accept the offer of friendship with its implied payofll The 
Capones sent back word that they would not interfere. 

The odds were now equal. And Vito Corleone had earned 
an enormous amount of ‘respect’ throughout the United 
States underworld with his humiliation of the Capones. For 
six months he outgeneralled Maranzano. He raid^ the crap 
games under that man’s protection, located his biggest policy 
banker in Harlem and had him relieved of a day’s play not 
only in money but in records. He engaged his enemies on aU 
fronts. Even in the garment centres he sent Qemenza and his 
men to flght on the side of the unionists against thp enforcers 
on the payroll of Maranzano and the owners of the dress 
firms. And on ail fronts his superior intelligence and organiz- 
ation made him the victor. Clemenza’s jolly ferocity, which 
Corleone employed judiciously, also helped turn the tide of 
battle. And then Don Corleone sent the held-back reserve of 
the Tessio regime after Maranzano himself. 

By this time Maranzano had dispatched emissaries suing for 
a peace. Vito Corleone refused to sec them, put them off on 
one pretext or another. The Maranzano soldiers were deserting 
their leader, not wishing to die in a losing cause. Bookmakers 



»nd sbyiocks were paying the Corlcooe organization their 
protection money. The war was all but over. 

And then finally on New Year's Eve of 1935, Tessio got 
inside the defences of Maranzano himself. The Maranzano 
lieutenants were anxious for a deal and agreed to lead their 
chief to the slaughter. They told him that a meeting had been 
arranged in a Brooklyn restaurant with Corleone and they 
accompanied Maranzano as his bodyguards. They left him 
sitting at a checkered table, morosely munching a piece of 
bread, and Bed the restaurant as Tessio and four of his men 
entered. The execution was swift and sure. Maranzano, his 
mouth fiiU of half-chewed bread, was riddled with bullets. 
The war was over. 

The Maranzano empire was incorporated into the Corleone 
operation. Don Corleone set up a system of tribute, allowing 
all incumbents to remain in their bookmaking and policy 
number spots. As a bonus he had a foothold in the unions of 
the garment centre which in later years was to prove ex- 
tremely important. And now that he had settled his business 
aflEairs the Don found trouble at home. 

Santino Corleone, Sonny, was sixteen years old and grown 
to an astonishing six feet with broad shoulders and a heavy 
face that was sensual but by no means effeminate. But where 
Fredo was a quiet boy, and Michael, of course, a toddler, 
Santino was constantly in trouble. He got into fights, did 
badly in school and, finally, Clemenza, who was the boy's god- 
father and had a duty to speak, came to Don Corleone one 
evening and informed him that his son had taken part in an 
armed robbery, a stupid affair which could have gone very 
badly. Sonny was obviously the ringleader, the two other boys 
in the robbery his followers. 

It was one of the very few times that Vito Corleone lost his 
temper. Tom Hagen had been living in his home for three 
years and he asked Qemenza if the orphan boy had been in- 
volved. Gemenza shook his head. Don Corleone had a car 
sent to bring Santino to his offices^ the Gtneo Pura Olive Oil 
Company. 

For the first time, the Don met defeat. Alone with his son, 
he gave fiiU vent to his rage, cursing the hulking Sonny in 


224 



SidHan dialect, a language so much more satisfying dian any 
other for expressing rage. He ended up with a question. * What 
gave you the right to commit such an act? WiaaLt made you 
wish to commit such an act?* 

Sonny stood there, angry, refusing to answer. The Don said 
with contempt, ‘And so stupid. '^9^t did you cam for that 
night’s work. Fifty dollars each? Twenty dollars ^ You risked 
your life for twenty dollars, eh?’ 

As if he had not heard these last words. Sonny said de- 
fiandy, ‘I saw you kill Fanucci.’ 

The Don said, ‘Ahhh’ and sank back in his chair. He waited. 

Sonny said, ‘When Fanucci left the building. Mama said I 
could go up the house. I saw you go up the roof and I foUowed 
you, I saw everything you did. I stay^ up there and I saw you 
throw away the wallet and the gun.’ 

Thf; Don sighed. * Well, then I can’t talk to you about how 
you sUGuid behave. Don’t you want to finish school, don’t you 
io be a lawyer? Lawyers can steal more money wifo a 
b-a-urc a thousand men with guns and masks.’ 

x - ^^cd at him and said slyly, ‘I want to enter the 
‘ r u When he saw that the Don’s fiicc remained 

he did not laugh at the joke, he added hastily, 
‘ I can icam he w to sell olive oil.* 

Still the Don did not answer. Finally he shrugged. ‘Every 
man has one destiny,’ he said. He did not add that the witnes- 
sing of Fanued’s murder had decided that of his son. He 
merely turned away and added quietly, ‘Come in tomorrow 
morning at nine o’clock. Genco will show you what to do.’ 

But Genco Abbandando, with that shrewd insight that a 
ConsigUori must have, realized the true wish of the Don and 
used Sonny mostly as a bodyguard for his father, a position in 
which he could also learn the subtleties of being a Don. And 
it brought out a professorial instinct in the Don himself, who 
often gave lectures on how to succeed for the benefit of his 
eldest son. 

Besides his oft-repeated theory that a man has hut one 
destiny, the Don constantly reproved Sonny for that young 
man’s outbursts of temper. The Don considered a use of 
threats the most foolish kind of exposure; the of 

«5 


GodMcr- Q 



mgu without foiethooght as the most dangerous iodulgenoe. 
No one had ever heard the Don utter a naked threat, no one 
had ever seen him in an uncontrollable rage. It was unthink- 
able. And so he tried to teach Sonny his own disciplines. He 
claimed that there was no greater natural advantage in life than 
having an enemy overestimate your faults, unless it was to 
have a friend underestimate your virtues. 

The caporegimiy Qemenaa, took Sonny in hand and taught 
him how to shoot and to wield a garrotte. Sonny had no taste 
for the Italian rope, he was too Americanized. He preferred 
the simple, direct, impersonal Anglo-Saxon gun, which 
saddened Qemenza. But Sonny became a constant and wel- 
come companion to his father, driving his car, helping him in 
litde details. For the next two years he seemed like the usual 
son entering his father’s business, not too bright, not too 
eager, content to hold down a soft job. 

Meanwhile his boyhood chum and semi-adopted brother 
Tom Hagen was going to college. Fredo was still in high 
school; Michael, the youngest brother, was in grammar 
school, and baby sister Connie was a toddling girl of four. 
The funHy had long since moved to an apartment house in the 
Bronx. Don Corleone was considering buying a house in 
Long Island, but he wanted to fit this in with other plans he 
was formulating. 

Vito Corleone was a man with vision. All the great cities of 
America were being torn by underworld strife. Guerrilla wars 
by the dozen flared up, ambitious hoodlums trying to carve 
themselves a bit of empire; men like Corleone himself were 
trying to keep their borders and rackets secure. Don Corleone 
saw that the newspapers and government agencies were using 
these killings to get stricter and stricter laws, to use harsher 
police methods. He foresaw that public indignation might 
even lead to a suspension of democratic procedures which 
could be fatal to him and his people. His own empire, inter- 
nally, was secure. He decided to bring peace to all the warring 
factions in New York Qty and then in the nation. 

He had no illusions about the dangerousness of his mission. 
He spent the first year meeting with different chiefs of gangs in 
New York, laying the groundwork, sounding them out, pro- 

226 



podog spheres of influence that would be honoured by a 
loosely bound confederated council. But there were too many 
factions, too many special interests that conflicted. Agree- 
ment was impossible. Like other great rulers and lawgivers in 
history Don Corleone decided that order and peace were im- 
possible until the number of reigning states had been reduced 
to a manageable number.. 

There were flve or six ^Families ’ too powerful to eliminate. 
But the rest, the neighbourhood Black Hand terrorists, the free- 
lance shylocks, the strong-arm bookmakers operating without 
the proper, that is to say paid, protection of the legal authorities, 
would have to go. And so he mounted what was in effect a 
colonial war against these people and threw all the resources of 
the Corleone organization against them. 

The pacifleation of the New York area took three years and 
had some unexpected rewards. At first it took the form of bad 
luck. A group of mad-dog Irish stick-up artists the Don had 
marked for exterminadoo almost carried the day with sheer 
Emerald Isle dan. By chance, and with suicidal bravery, one of 
these Idsh gunmen pierced the Don’s proteedve cordon and 
put a shot into his chest. The assassin was immediately riddled 
with bullets but the damage was done. 

However this gave Sandno Corleone his chance. With his 
frther out of acdon. Sonny took command of a troop, his own 
figiws, with the rank of caportffme, and like a young, un- 
trumpeted Napoleon, showed a genius for dty warfiure. He 
also showed a merciless ruthlessness, the lack of which had 
been Don Corleone’s only fiiult as a conqueror. 

From 1955 to 1937 Sonny Corleone made a reputation as the 
most cunning and relendess execudoner the underworld had 
yet known. Yet for sheer terror even he was eclipsed by the 
awesome man named Luca Brasi. 

It was Brasi who went after the rest of the Irish gunmen and 
single-handedly wiped them out. It was Brasi, operating alone 
when one of the six powerful fiunilies tded to interfere and 
become the protector of the mdq>endent8, who assassinated 
the head of that fiunily as a warning. Shordy afrer, the Don 
recovered from his wound and made peace with that pardcular 



By 1937 peace and harmony reigned in New York City 
except for minor incidents, minor misunderstandings which 
were, of course, sometimes fatal. 

As the rulers of 'ancient cities always kept an anxious eye on 
the barbarian tribes roving around their walls, so Don Cor- 
leone kept an eye on the adairs of the world outside his world. 
He noted the coming of Hitler, the £dl of Spain, Germany’s 
strong-arming of Britain at Munich. Unblinkered by that out- 
side world, he saw clearly the coming global wax and he 
understood the implications. His own world would be more im- 
pregnable than before. Not only that, fortunes could be made 
in time of war by alert, foresighted folk. But to do so peace 
must reign in his domain while war raged in the world outside. 

Don Corleone carried his message through the United 
States. He conferred with compatriots in Los Angeles, San 
Francisco, Qeyeland, Chicago, Philadelphia, Miami, and 
Boston. He was the underworld apostle of peace and, by 1939, 
more successful than any Pope, he had achieved a working 
agreement amongst the most powerful underworld organiaa- 
dons in the country. Like the Consdtudon of the United States 
this agreement respected fully the internal authority of each 
meml^ in his state or city. The agreement covered only 
spheres of influence and an agreement to enforce peace in the 
underworld. 

And so when World War n broke out in 1939, when the 
United States joined the conflict in 1941, the world of Don 
"Vito Corleone was at peace, in order, f^iy prepared to reap the 
golden harvest on equal terms with all the other industries of a 
booming Amenca. The Corleone Family had a hand in sup- 
plying black-market OP A food stamps, gasoline stamps, even 
tiaVd priorities. It could help get war contracts and then help 
get black-market materials for those garment centre clothing 
firms who were not given enough raw material because they 
did not have government contracts. He could even get all the 
young men in his organization, those eligihlc for Army draft, 
excused from fighting in the foreign war. He did this with the 
aid of doctors who advised what drugs had to be taken before 
physical examination, or by placing the men in draft-exempt 
positions in the war industries. 

228 



And 80 the Don could take pride in his rule. His world was 
safe for those who had sworn their loyalty to him; other men 
who believed in law and order were dying by the millions. The 
only dy in the ointment was that his own son, Michael Cor- 
leone, refused to be helped, insisted on volunteering to serve 
his own country. And to the Don^s astonishment, so did a few 
of his other young men in the organization. One of the men, 
trying to explain this to his caporegi^e^ said, "This country has 
been good to me.’ Upon this story being relayed to the Don he 
said angrily to the caporegim^ have been good to him.’ It 
might have gone badly for these people but, as he had excused 
his son Michael, so must he excuse other young men who so 
misunderstood their duty to their Don and to themselves. 

At the end of World War II Don Corleone knew that again 
his world would have to change its ways, that it would have to 
fit itself more snugly into the ways of the other, larger world. 
He believed he could do this with no loss of profit. 

There was reason for this belief in his own experience. What 
had put him on the right track were two personal aflairs. 
Early in his career the then-young Nazorine, only a baker’s 
helper planning to get married, had come to him for assistance. 
He and his future bride, a good Italian girl, had saved their 
money and had paid the enormous sum of thrte hundred 
dollars to a wholesaler of furniture recommended to them. 
This wholesaler had let them pick out everything they wanted 
to furnish their tenement apartment. A fine sturdy bedroom set 
with two bureaux and lamps. Also the living room set of heavy 
stufied sofii and stuffed armchairs, all covered with rich gold- 
threaded fabric. Nazorine and his fianc6e had spent a happy 
day picking out what they wanted from the huge •warehouse 
crowded with furniture. The wholesaler took their money, 
their three hundred dollars wrung from the sweat of their 
blood, and pocketed it and promised the furniture to be de- 
livered within the week to the already rented flat. 

The very next week however, the firm had gone into bank- 
ruptcy. The great warehouse stocked with furniture had been 
sealed shut and attached for payment of creditors. The whole- 
saler had disappeared to give other creditors time to unleash 
their anger on the empty air. Nazorine, one of these, went to 


229 



his kwyer, who told him nothing could be done until the case 
was setded in court and all creditors satisfied. This might take 
three years and Nazorine would be lucky to get back ten cents 
on the dollar. 

Vito Corleone listened to this story with amtised disbelief. 
It was not possible that the law could allow such thievery. The 
wholesaler owned his own palatial home, an estate in Long 
Island, a luxurious automobile, and was sending his children 
to college. How could he keep the three hundred dollars of 
the poor baker Nazorine and not give him the furniture he had 
paid for? But, to make sure, Vito Corleone had Genco 
Abbandando check it out with the lawyers who represented 
the Genco Pura company. 

They verified the story of Nazorine. The wholesaler had all 
his personal wealth in his wife’s name. His furniture business 
was incorporated and he was not personally liable. True, he 
had shown bad faith by taking the money of Nazorine when he 
knew he was going to file bankruptcy but this was a common 
practice. Under law there was nothing to be done. 

Of course the matter was easily adjusted. Don Corleone sent 
his Consiglioriy Genco Abbandando, to speak to the wholesaler, 
and as was to be expected, that wide-awake businessman 
caught the drift immediately and arranged for Nazorine to get 
his furniture. But it was an interesting lesson for the young 
Vito Corleone. 

The second incident had more far-reaching repercussions. 
In 1939, Don Corleone had decided to move his family out of 
the city. Like any other parent he wanted his children to go to 
better schools and mix with better companions. For his own 
personal reasons he wanted the anonymity of suburban life 
where his reputation was not known. He bought the mall 
property in Long Beach, which at that time had only four 
newly built houses but with plenty of room for more. Sonny 
was formally engaged to Sandra and would soon marry, one of 
the houses would be for him. One of the houses was for the 
Don. Another was for Genco Abbandando and his family. 
The other was kept vacant at the time. 

A week after the mall was occupied, a group of three work- 
men came in all innocence with their truck. They claimed to be 


230 



furnace inspectors for the town of Long Beach. One of the 
Don’s young bodyguards let the men in and led them to the 
furnace in the basement. The Don, his wife and Sonny were in 
the garden taking their ease and enjoying the salty sea air. 

Much to the Don’s annoyance he was summoned into the 
house by his bodyguard. The three workmen, all big burly 
fellows, were grouped around the furnace. They had taken it 
apart, it was strewn around the cement basement floor. The 
leader, an authoritative man, said to the Don in a gruff voice, 
‘ Your furnace is in lousy shape. If you want us to fix it and put 
it together again, it’ll cost you one hundred fifty dollars for 
labour and parts and then we’ll pass you for county inspec- 
tion.’ He took out a red paper label. ‘We stamp this seal on it, 
see, then nobody from the county bothers you again.’ 

The Don was amused. It had been a boring, quiet week in 
which he had had to neglect his business to take care of such 
family details moving to a new house entailed. In more broken 
English than his usual slight acc^^nt he asked, ‘If I don’t pay 
you, what happens to my furnace? ’ 

The leader of the three men shrugged. ‘We just leave the 
furnace the way it is now.’ He gestured at the metal parts 
strewn over the floor. 

The Don said meekly, ‘Wait, I’ll get you your money.’ Then 
he went out into the garden and said to Sonny, ‘Listen, there’s 
some men working on the furnace, I don’t understand what 
they want. Go in and take care of the matter.’ It was not 
simply a joke; he was considering making his son his under- 
boss. This was one of the tests a business executive had to 
pass. 

Sonny’s solution did not altogether please his father. It was 
too direct, too lacking in Sicilian subtleness. He was the 
Qub, not the Rapier. For as soon as Sonny heard the leader’s 
demand he held the three men at gunpoint and had them 
thoroughly bastinadoed by the bodyguards. Then he made 
them put the furnace together again and tidy up the basement. 
He searched them and found that they actually were employed 
by a house-improvement firm with headquarters in Suffolk 
County. He learned the name of the man who owned the firm. 
Then he kicked the three men to their truck. ‘ Don’t let me see 



you in l^ong Beach again/ he told them. 'I’ll have your bails 
hanging from your cars.’ 

It was typical of the young Santtno^ before he became older 
and crueller, that he extended his protection to the com- 
munity he lived in. Sonny paid a personal call to the home- 
improvement firm owner and told him not to send any of his 
men into the Long Beach area ever again. As soon as the 
Corlcone Family set up their usual business liaison with the 
local police force they were informed of all such complaints 
and all crimes by professional criminals. In less than a year 
Long Beach became the most crime-free town of its sixe in the 
United States. Professional sdek-up artists and sttong-arms 
received one warning not to piy their trade in the town. They 
were ailow'eci one ohence. V/hen ttiey comm.nred a seconn they 
simply disappeared. The himfi^m home-improvement gyp 
artists, i-he door-lo-door con men were politely warned that 
they were not welcome in Long Beach. Those conhdent con 
men who disregaraed the wanimg were beaten within an mch 
of theii lives. Resident young punks wno iiad no respect for 
law and proper authority were advnsed in the most fatherly 
fashion to run away from borne. j.ong Beaca became a model 
city. 

What impressed the T‘>r»ri was the legal validity of these sales 
swindles. Clearly there was a place for a man of his talents in 
that other world which had been closed to him as an honest 
youth, l ie took appropriate steps to enter that world. 

And so he lived happily on tlie mail in Long Beach, con- 
solidating and enlarging his empire, until after the war was 
over, the Turk Sollozzo broke the peace and plunged the 
Don’s world into its own >var, and brought liim to his hospital 
bed. 
